
                              CHAPTER I


Were it not that the most common of all inquiries, respecting every
man who comes before the public, is, “who is he? whence did he
proceed? who were his parents?” &c., I would not detain the reader
with any account of my humble ancestors and their circumstances.
But, since men naturally expect this information, and would hence
consider my narrative imperfect without it, I shall take the liberty
to introduce them.

My father’s occupation was that of _valet de chambre_ to Lord William
Fitzroy, son of the Duke of Grafton. My recollections concerning him
are few and indistinct, as he died while I was yet scarcely three
years old. One little incident alone reminds me of wearing a mourning
dress as a memento of sorrow for his death. Returning from the parish
church in Walthamstow, I observed the larger boys amusing themselves
by swinging across the rails of the fences; endeavoring to join in
their amusement, my hands slipped, and falling into a muddy ditch, I
nearly finished my course, ere it was well begun, by a violent death.
A benevolent stranger, however, rescued me, and once safe, my grief
for the sad condition of my little black frock was excessive and
inconsolable. A trifling cause for sorrow, to be sure, yet men and
women often grieve for causes equally contemptible.

Although my personal remembrances of my father’s death are so
indistinct, yet the frequent mention made of him by my mother, has
left the pleasing impression on my mind that he died a Christian. “I
have thought of my numerous sins, but God has forgiven them all. Be
not troubled, for the Lord will provide for you and your children.
You need not fear to leave me, for I am not alone; God is with me,
though you are out of the room,” were among his dying expressions;
when, after fourteen months endurance of the pains which accompany a
slow consumption, he approached “that bourne from which no traveller
returns.” I expect to find my honored father in heaven.

Wanstead, in Essex, about seven miles from the great metropolis
of England, was the town, and 1798 the year, of my birth. Were it
necessary to designate the place more particularly, it might be said
that the part of Wanstead where I first struggled into being, was
called Nightingale Place; a most musical name, conferred in honor of
the nightingales which abounded in the vicinity.

Two years subsequently to my father’s demise, my mother became an
inmate of the family of Lady Francis Spencer, daughter of the Duke of
Grafton, and wife of Lord Spencer. As a consequence of this event,
I was deprived of a mother’s care and consigned to the charge of my
aunt Turner, whose family amounted to the very respectable number
of twenty-two sons and two daughters. The transfer of a child from
the care of its parent to that of another person, may appear, at
first sight, to be a very unimportant incident; but trifling as it
seems, it often exerts an influence which very materially changes
the destiny of the child: it was so in my case. Most of my cousins
were sailors, and some of them were constantly returning home,
bringing, with true sailors’ munificence, the pleasing and curious
productions of distant climes as presents to their parents and
friends; then, seated round the bright hearth-side, they used to tell
of wild adventures and hair-breadth escapes, spinning out the winter
evening’s tale to the infinite delight of their willing listeners.
Poor fellows! three of them died at sea; two more, John and Richard,
perished in the ill-fated _Blenheim_, a seventy-four gun ship of the
British navy, which went down off the Cape of Good Hope, with seven
hundred as brave men on board as ever trod a plank. Notwithstanding
these sad recollections, and though none perceived it, my three
years’ residence among these “sailors bold” decided the nature of my
future calling; it captivated my imagination and begat a curiosity,
which ultimately led me to make my “home upon the bounding deep.”

An orphan is ever exposed to changes. The loss of either parent
calls for a degree of sympathy and kindness from others, which
they are rarely willing to expend except on their own. Such is the
almost universal selfishness of human nature. My experience affords
a verification of the truthfulness of the remark. For some cause or
other, it became inconvenient for me to remain with my kind aunt
Turner, and my next home was with a widowed aunt, at Wanstead, where
I did not meet with the same kindness of treatment. The breaking of
a cup, or any of the thousand-and-one offences found in the list of
juvenile defects, was sure to bring upon me the infliction of the
rod; and, what was equally painful, my most economical aunt exacted
the full payment for all these losses from the little pocket money
I obtained by holding a horse, running errands, or as new-year and
Christmas presents; thus gratifying her temper and her covetousness
at once, besides embittering, to some extent, the boyish hours of my
unfortunate self.

There is no evil in the management of children to be more deprecated
than that species of treatment which tends to destroy their
happiness. Correction for obvious faults, in a proper manner, is
essential to their proper moral training; but a habit of incessantly
scolding them for every little accident or offence, only serves to
excite the growth of evil passions and to make them dislike their
home; things to be avoided as much as Scylla and Charybdis by the
careful mariner. The influence of such mal-treatment follows the
child through life, like an evil genius, materially affecting his
views of life and the temper of his mind. For aught that now occurs
to me, but for this unkindness, my early predilection for the sea
would have died within me; while, as it was, I panted to enjoy
the freedom my fancy painted in its pictures of sailor life. To
add to my sorrows, my mother removed my sister, who had been my
cheerful companion and true friend, to a lady’s school at Woodstock,
in Oxfordshire, for the twofold purpose of affording her greater
literary advantages, and of being able to see her more frequently.

Several incidents occurred during my abode here, which tended to
increase my growing desire. A smart, active sailor, over six feet
in height, and well-proportioned, one day presented himself at my
aunt’s door. He told us he had been to America, where he had seen a
young man named George Turner, who was her nephew and my cousin. He
proceeded to tell many fine stories about him, and at last inquired
if she should not like to see him, and if she should know him.

“I don’t know as I should,” said my aunt, “he has been away so long.”

“Well, then,” replied he, “I am George Turner!”

This fine, bold seaman, then, was my own cousin, son to my aunt
Turner; he had been eleven years at sea, and, after visiting his
parents, took this method of surprising his aunt. Most likely he
has made this adventure the subject of many a forecastle yarn since
then. While he remained he was so jolly, so liberal, and so full of
pleasant stories, that I began to feel quite sure that sailors were
noble fellows.

We were also favored with a visit from an uncle, then visiting Europe
from the West Indies. He was one of two brothers, who were educated
at Greenwich for the navy. One of them had entered the British navy,
and by dint of merit and hard service rose to the possession of a
commission in the service, but ultimately perished at sea. This one
had chosen the merchant service, but afterwards settled at Antigua.
He took me with him to London, and carried me over the West India
docks; he being well acquainted with many of the captains, they
treated me with playful attention, inquiring if I did not wish to
be a cabin-boy, and the like. When I returned to Wanstead, it was
with a stronger desire than ever to be a sailor. My uncle went to
Trinidad, and died shortly after.

A very pleasant piece of intelligence greeted me soon after these
incidents; it was nothing less than my removal from the care of my
unkind aunt to the roof of my mother. Weary of her widowhood, she
had again become a wife. My new parent was a widower with one son; a
carpenter by occupation, in the employ of the Duke of Marlborough.
Great was my joy when this fact was communicated to my young mind. I
hailed it as a deliverance from bondage, and with beaming eyes and
cheerful face hurried to bid adieu to my classmates in the day and
in the Sunday school--a sad proof of the unfitness of my aunt for
her task; since a child properly treated, will love its _home_ too
well to quit it without a tear; and if parents and guardians wish to
prevent their children from being wanderers and stragglers through
the wide world, let me bid them exert the utmost effort to make their
home pleasant. Throw a charm round it, make it enchanted ground,
cause it to become, in the language of a living poet,

      “The fairy ring of bliss”

and then your children will love it too well to wander.

But I was now about to leave Wanstead, and, although delighted to
be rid of the surveillance of a cross old relation, there were some
things which threw an air of sadness occasionally over my mind.
There were many pleasant associations connected with the place; its
beautiful park, with herds of timid deer grazing under its tall oaks,
upon whose green old heads the sun had shone for centuries; the
venerable mansion, seated like a queen amid the sylvan scene; the old
parish church, with its gorgeously painted windows, to which I had
often walked on the Sabbath with my fellow-scholars in the Sabbath
school, and beside whose deep-toned organ I had sat listening to
the learned priest; the annual hunt at Easter, in which I had often
joined the crew of idle lads that gave chase to the distracted deer;
and the pleasant walks, made cheerful by the songs of innumerable
birds, in Epping forest, were all to be left--perhaps forever.
This thought made me somewhat sad, but it was swallowed up in the
joy I felt when my mother appeared to conduct me to Bladen, some
sixty miles from London, which was the place of her abode since her
marriage.

Behold me then, gentle reader, seated with my mother on the outside
of a stage-coach, with some ten fellow-passengers. The stage-coach
of England is quite a different vehicle from the carriage known by
that name in America. True, it is drawn by four horses, and it runs
on four wheels, but here the likeness ends; instead of being built
to carry twelve persons inside, it carries but six, while outside it
has seats for twelve. Three or four passengers ride very comfortably
behind, in what is called the basket, which is the territory of the
guard, as the boot before is of the coachman. All mail coaches, and
all others travelling in the night, carry a guard, or an armed man,
for the purpose of protecting the coach from the attacks of footpads
or highway robbers.

The dullness of our journey was somewhat relieved, after a long
season of silence, by the distress of an unfortunate passenger, who,
falling asleep, nodded so violently, that his hat, supposing it was
receiving notice to quit, very unceremoniously took leave of the
skull it covered, and plunged into the mud. The outcry of the poor
passenger, who was soon waked by the wind sporting amid his hair, and
his unavailing requests to stop the stage, put us all into good humor
with ourselves and with each other.

We had another source of relief in the antics of a wild, hair-brained
sailor. From spinning yarns, which looked amazingly like new
inventions, he would take to dancing on the roof of the coach; at the
foot of a hill he would leap off, and then spring up again with the
agility of a monkey, to the no small amusement of the passengers.
The more I saw of this reckless, thoughtless tar, the more enamored
I became with the idea of a sea life; and thus this journey to my
mother’s new abode was another link in the chain that decided my
future destiny in the drama of life. How strangely and imperceptibly
do small events tend to unexpected results. A match may fire a city
and lay desolate the work of ages; a single leak may sink a bark
and carry desolation to a hundred firesides--and trifles in the
daily scenes of human life, give character to our immortality. We
cannot, therefore, too carefully watch the influence of small events,
especially on young minds.

At Woodstock, famed in the annals of England as the scene of the
loves of King Henry and Rosamond Clifford, we quitted our stage
companions, and proceeded on foot to Bladen, two miles distant.
Our road lay through Blenheim or Woodstock park, which we entered
through the triumphal arch, a spacious portal, erected to the memory
of John, Duke of Marlborough, by Sarah, his duchess. On entering the
park, which is nearly twelve miles in circumference, one of the most
beautiful prospects imaginable disclosed itself. Blenheim Palace,
which is among the most magnificent piles of architecture in England,
appeared in front; on the left were to be seen a part of the village
of Woodstock, and on the right a broad and spacious lake, crossed by
a superb bridge;[1] a lofty column on the rising ground, erected in
honor of John, Duke of Marlborough, on which is the statue of that
noble warrior; a delightful valley, hills, plantations, herds of deer
feeding, shady groves and ancient trees, all conspired to render the
scene enchantingly beautiful.

Blenheim Palace, or Castle, was built at the public expense, in
the reign of Queen Anne, and was given, with its annexed demesnes,
in concurrence with the voice of parliament, to John, Duke of
Marlborough, as a testimony of royal favor and national gratitude
for his successes over the French and Bavarians; particularly for his
victory at Blenheim, on the banks of the Danube, on the 2d of August,
1704.

Crossing the park towards Bladen, we were met by my father-in-law,[2]
who received me with a kindness which prepossessed me at once in his
favor; he conducted us home, where, to my no small gratification, I
met my sister.

My father-in-law appeared to be in comfortable circumstances. He
resided in a very neat house, built of stone, shaded by a noble
apricot tree, and ornamented with a small but pretty garden. This,
together with another similar tenement, was his own property. To add
to my satisfaction, I perceived that he was very kind to my mother,
and also to myself. She one day expressed a desire to have the cold
stone floor of the kitchen removed, and boarded instead; my father,
at considerable expense, gratified her wish; this assured me of his
regard for her comfort.

With the village itself, I was equally well pleased. Though
containing few houses, it was delightfully pleasant. Fine farms,
with large flocks of quiet sheep grazing on their hill-sides;
expansive fields, surrounded with fragrant hawthorn hedges; and old
farm-houses, with their thatched roofs, and massive wheat ricks, met
the pleased eye on all sides; while cultivated gardens and numerous
wild flowers, especially the modest cowslip and humble violet,
scented the air and perfumed the breeze. Thus far, perhaps, Bladen
was equal to Wanstead; but in its moral aspects it was inferior.
There was far less regard for the Sabbath; less attention to the
moral culture of the young, than at the latter place. That blessed
institution, which has vivified and renewed the church, which has
filled her with the vigorous pulsations of youth--from which, as
from some prolific nursery, she has obtained the plants, which now
stand on her mountain-tops like the tall cedars of Lebanon--the
modest, unassuming Sabbath school was not there. Consequently, the
Sabbath was spent in roaming about the fields, in amusements, in
visiting, in taking excursions to a place called Ramsden, some seven
miles distant. True, there was a parish church, with two clergymen
belonging to its altars, but there was service only once every
Sunday within its ancient walls. During Lent, however, both priests
and people were more religious; the church was better attended; the
children were examined as to their knowledge of the church catechism!
They were even excited to diligence in committing it to memory by
the inducement of reward. A Bible and two prayer books were given to
the lads who excelled in answering the questions. At the first Lent
examination after my coming to Bladen, the Bible, the highest prize,
was awarded to me, and the second year the minister assigned me the
task of hearing the others recite--a striking proof of the benefit
of Sunday school instruction; it gave me both a moral and mental
superiority over all my compeers in the little village of Bladen.
This special attention to religion only lasted during the term of
Lent; when, with a return to the use of meat, the people returned to
the neglect of the Sabbath.

The inhabitants of Bladen were very social in their habits. They held
an annual feast, called Bladen feast, to which they invited their
friends from other towns; it commenced on Sabbath and continued three
days. Eating, drinking, talking, fortune-telling, gambling, occupied
three days of wassail and jollity; after which the visitors returned
to their respective towns, and the people to their occupations. The
neighboring villages gave similar feasts in their turn. They were
occasions of much evil and folly.

My time flew very rapidly and pleasantly away for two or three years,
until, like most children, I began to sigh for deliverance from the
restraints of home. I had already left school, and for some time,
being now about thirteen years of age, had been employed in the
pleasure-grounds of Blenheim Palace. This, however, was too tame a
business for a lad of my spirits. I had heard tales of the sea from
my cousins; my mother had filled my mind with the exploits of my
grandfather; my imagination painted a life on the great deep in the
most glowing colors; my mind grew uneasy; every day, my ordinary
pursuits became more and more irksome, and I was continually talking
about going to sea; indeed, I had made myself unhappy by being so
discontented.

Little do lads and young men know of the difference between the
comfort of a parent’s roof and the indifference, unkindness, and
trouble they invariably experience, who go out into the world, until
they have made the experiment. They paint everything in bright
colors; they fancy the future to be all sunshine, all sweets, all
flowers, but are sure to be wofully disappointed, when once away
from the fireside of their infancy. Let me advise young people, if
they wish to escape hardships, to be contented, to remain quietly at
home, abiding the openings of Providence, obeying the wishes of their
parents, who not only have their best good at heart, but, however
they may think to the contrary, actually know what is most for their
advantage.

My passion for a seaman’s life was not a little increased by a
soldier, who was sergeant to a company in Lord Francis Spencer’s
regiment of cavalry. Seated by my father’s hearth-side, this old
soldier, who had once been a sailor, would beguile many an evening
hour with his endless tale, while I sat listening in enrapt
attention. My mother, too, heedlessly fanned the flame by her
descriptions of the noble appearance of the ships she had seen when
at Brighton. Besides this, a footman at Blenheim House used to sing
a song called “the poor little sailor boy;” which, although somewhat
gloomy in its descriptions, only served to heighten the flame of
desire within me, until I could think of nothing else, day or night,
but of going to sea.

Finding my desires so strong, my kind-hearted mother mentioned
them to Lady Spencer. Just at that time, her brother, Lord William
Fitzroy, who was then expecting the command of a frigate, and with
whom my departed father had lived as valet, happened to visit
Blenheim, previously to going to sea. Anxious to serve my mother,
Lady Spencer mentioned me to Lord Fitzroy. He sent for me. Trembling
in every joint, I was ushered into his presence. He inquired if I
should like to go to sea. “Yes, my lord, I should,” was my ready
answer. He dismissed me, after some further questionings; but was
heard to say, before he left, that he would take me under his care,
and see to my future advancement.

These dazzling prospects not only well nigh turned my brain, but
decided my parents to send me to sea. To have their son an _officer_
in the navy was an unlooked-for honor; and they now entered into my
plans and feelings with almost as much ardor as myself. Alas! We
were all doomed to learn how little confidence can be placed in the
promises of nobles!

Not long after Lord Fitzroy’s departure, we received a letter stating
the fact of his appointment to his majesty’s frigate _Macedonian_,
which, being out of dock, was rapidly preparing for sea. This
intelligence was the signal for bustle, excitement, preparation,
and I know not what. Friends and gossips constantly crowded in to
administer their gratuitous advice; some predicting, to my infinite
delight, that certainly so smart a boy would make a great man; others
wore very grave countenances, and gave certain expressive shrugs of
the shoulders, while they told of flogging through the fleet, or of
being “seized up” for merely a look or a word; in short, but for a
strong conviction in my own breast that this was all said for effect,
it is doubtful whether they would not have succeeded in deterring me
from my purpose.

At last, after much ado, the long-expected day arrived when I was to
bid farewell to home and friends, to venture abroad upon an unknown
future. It would only vex the reader by its commonplace character,
or I would reveal all the nice little acts of parental, brotherly and
neighborly affection which took place. Suffice it to say, that my
parting was very much the same as that of all other boys of twelve,
when they leave home for the first time--a mixture of hopes and
fears, of tears and smiles, of sunshine and cloud.

Attended by my mother and her infant daughter, on the 12th day
of July, 1810, I turned my back on the quiet hamlet of Bladen.
Henceforth my lot was to be cast amid noise, dissipation, storms
and danger. This, however, disturbed my mind but little; brushing
away a tear, I leaped gaily on to the outside of the coach, and
in a few minutes, enveloped in a cloud of dust, was on my way to
London, filled with the one absorbing idea, “I am going to sea! I
am going to sea!” Should the reader take the trouble to read the
following chapters, he will learn the mishaps, hardships, pleasures
and successes that befell me there; and though my narrative may not
be filled with the witching tales, and romantic descriptions, that
abound in the works of the novelist, it shall at least commend itself
to his notice for its truthfulness.




                              CHAPTER II


Before we sought the decks of the _Macedonian_ we paid a short
visit to Wanstead, where we met with very pleasant reception, very
hospitable entertainment, very affectionate adieus. Returning to
London, we hired a boat and sailed down the Thames, on whose bosom
reposed the commerce of the world, to Gravesend, where we spent the
night. The next morning I experienced a new gratification, which
was nothing less than being arrayed in a complete suit of sailor
apparel; a tarpaulin hat, round blue jacket and wide pantaloons.
Never did young knight swell with loftier emotion when donning for
the first time his iron dress, than I did when in sea dress I trod
the streets of Gravesend. This had always been my highest ambition.
The gaudily dressed soldier never had charms for me; but a sailor,
how nice he looked! Well, here I stood, at last, in the often coveted
dress; it was the first luxury connected with my life at sea. Pity
that each successive step had not yielded me equal delight. But it
was mine to learn that anticipation and reality were not born twins;
that in fact there are scarcely any two existences so essentially
different in their characteristics. That I should not lack the means
of comfort, my good mother purchased me a chest of clothing, and, as
her last token of maternal care, presented me with a Bible, a prayer
book, and, strangely inconsistent companions, a pack of cards! Thus
equipped, we once more hired a boat and descended the river two miles
below Gravesend, where lay the _Macedonian_, in graceful majesty on
the sparkling waters.

The first guest we met on board was _disappointment_. From the
promises of Lord Fitzroy, we very strangely supposed that he felt
my importance nearly as much as did my mother or father. Judge then
how we felt, when we learned that no one knew anything in particular
about my veritable self; yet, as his Lordship was absent, they said
I might remain on board until his return. This was rather a damper
on my spirits, but flattering myself that all would be right on
his return, I soon rallied again, and, aided by the presence of my
mother, passed a very agreeable day.

Towards night, my mother left me; it scarcely need be said, she wept
when we parted. What mother would not? She did weep, she strained me
to her heart, and impressed affection’s purest kiss upon my cheek.
How like a dream that moment fled! Now, she held me in her arms; a
moment after, she was seated in the light boat and gliding along the
turbid Thames, on her homeward way. I leaned over the taffrail and
gazed on the departing boat, and when it disappeared, I turned away
and wept.

The morning after my arrival, I was put into a “mess.” The crew of
a man of war is divided into little communities of about eight,
called _messes_. These eat and drink together, and are, as it were,
so many families. The mess to which I was introduced, was composed
of your genuine, weather-beaten, old tars. But for one of its
members, it would have suited me very well; this one, a real gruff
old “bull-dog,” named Hudson, took into his head to hate me at first
sight. He treated me with so much abuse and unkindness, that my
messmates soon advised me to change my mess, a privilege which is
wisely allowed, and which tends very much to the good fellowship of a
ship’s crew; for if there are disagreeable men among them, they can
in this way be got rid of; it is no unfrequent case to find a few,
who have been spurned from all the messes in the ship, obliged to
mess by themselves.

This unkindness from the brutal Hudson rather chilled my enthusiasm.
The crew, too, by some means had an impression that my mother had
brought me on board to get rid of me, and therefore bestowed their
bitterest curses on her in the most profuse manner imaginable.
Swearing I had heard before, but never such as I heard there. Nor
was this all; in performing the work assigned me, which consisted in
helping the seamen take in provisions, powder, shot, etc., I felt
the insults and tyranny of the midshipmen. These little minions of
power ordered and drove me round like a dog, nor did I and the other
boys dare interpose a word. They were _officers_; their word was our
law, and woe betide the presumptuous boy that dared refuse implicit
obedience.

These things reminded me of what had been said to me of the hardships
of sea life in a man of war. I began to wish myself back in my
father’s house at Bladen. This, however, was impossible, and to add
to my discouragement they told me I was entered on the ship’s books
for life. Dreary prospect! I felt more than half disposed, as I went
to my tasks, to use the language of the Irishman, as sung by my
shipmates. Tempted and beguiled while intoxicated, he had enlisted
for a soldier, but found the sergeant at the _recruiting office_ and
the sergeant on the _drill-field_ very different personages. He is
hence made to say,

      “It was early next morning to drill I was sent,
      And its och to my soul! I began to lament;
      Cannot you be aisy and let me alone?
      Don’t you see I’ve got arms, legs, and feet of my own?”

But although somewhat grieved with my first experience of sailor
life, I secretly struggled against my feelings, and with the most
philosophic desperation resolved to make the best of my condition.
We were kept busily at work every day until the ship’s stores were
all on board, and our frigate was ready for sea. Then two hundred
more men, draughted from receiving ships, came on board, to complete
the number of our crew, which, after this addition, numbered full
three hundred men. The jocularity, pleasantry, humor and good feeling
that now prevailed on board our frigate, somewhat softened the
unpleasantness of my lot, and cultivated a feeling of reconciliation
to my circumstances. Various little friendships, which sprang up
between me and my shipmates, threw a gleam of gladness across my
path; a habit of attention, respect and obedience in a short time
secured me universal good will. I began to be tolerably satisfied.

Many boys complain of ill usage at sea. I know they are subjected to
it in many instances; yet, in most cases, they owe it to their own
boldness. A boy on shipboard, who is habitually saucy, will be kicked
and cuffed by all with whom he has to do; he will be made miserable.
The reason is, I imagine, that sailors, being treated as inferiors
themselves, love to find opportunity to act the _superior_ over some
one. They do this over the boys, and if they find a saucy, insolent
one, they show him no mercy. Permit me, then, to advise boys who go
to sea, to be civil and obliging to all; they will be amply repaid
for the effort it may cost them to make the trial, especially if they
gain the reputation, as I did, of being among the best boys in the
ship.

A vessel of war contains a little community of human beings,
isolated, for the time being, from the rest of mankind. This
community is governed by laws peculiar to itself; it is arranged and
divided in a manner suitable to its circumstances. Hence, when its
members first come together, each one is assigned his respective
station and duty. For every task, from getting up the anchor to
unbending the sails, aloft and below, at the mess-tub or in the
hammock, each task has its man, and each man his place. A ship
contains a set of human machinery, in which every man is a wheel, a
band, or a crank, all moving with wonderful regularity and precision
to the will of its machinist--the all-powerful captain.

The men are distributed in all parts of the vessel; those in the
tops are called fore-top-men, main-top-men, and mizzen-top-men,
with two captains to each top, one for each watch. These top-men
have to loose, take in, reef and furl the sails aloft, such as
the top-gallant sails, top-sails, top-gallant royal, and top-sail
studding-sails. Others are called forecastle men, waisters, and the
after-guard; these have to loose, tend, and furl the courses, that
is, the fore-sail, the main-sail and lower studding-sails; they
also have to set the jib, flying-jib, and spanker; the after-guard
have a special charge to coil up all ropes in the after part of
the ship. Others are called _scavengers_; these, as their not very
attractive name imports, have to sweep and pick up the dirt that
may chance to gather through the day, and throw it overboard.
Then come the boys, who are mostly employed as servants to the
officers. Our captain had a steward and a boy; these acted as his
domestic servants in his large and stately cabin, which, to meet
the ideas of landsmen, may be called his house. The lieutenants,
purser, surgeon, and sailing-master, had each a boy; they, together
with the two lieutenants of marines, who were waited upon by two
marines, form what is called the ward-room officers. The ward-room
is a large cabin, (I mean large for a ship, of course,) below the
captain’s, where they all mess together; aft of this cabin is a
smaller one, which serves as a species of store-room. Besides
these accommodations, every ward-room officer has his state-room,
containing his cot, wash-stand, writing-desk, clothes, etc. The
gunner, boatswain, and some others, are also allowed a boy; and a
man and boy are appointed to be the servants of a certain number of
midshipmen.

Another arrangement is that of forming the ship’s company into
watches. The captain, first lieutenant, surgeon, purser, boatswain,
gunner, carpenter, armorer, together with the stewards and boys, are
excused from belonging to them, but are liable to be called out to
take in sail; some of the last mentioned are called _idlers_. All
others are in watches, called the larboard and starboard watches.

Stations are also assigned at the guns, to the whole crew. When at
sea, the drummer beats to quarters every night. This beat, by which
the men are summoned to quarters, is a regular tune. I have often
heard the words sung which belong to it; this is the chorus:

      “Hearts of oak are our ships, jolly tars are our men,
      We always are ready, steady, boys, steady,
      To fight and to conquer again and again.”

At the roll of this evening drum, all hands hurry to the guns. Eight
men and a boy are stationed at each gun, one of whom is captain of
the gun, another sponges and loads it, the rest take hold of the side
tackle-falls, to run the gun in and out; while the boy is employed in
handing the cartridges, for which he is honored with the singularly
euphonious cognomen of powder-monkey.

Besides these arrangements among the men, there are from thirty to
forty marines to be disposed of. These do duty as sentries at the
captain’s cabin, the ward-room, and at the galley during the time of
cooking. They are also stationed at the large guns at night, as far
as their numbers run. When a ship is in action, and small arms can be
brought to bear on the enemy, they are stationed on the spar-deck;
they are also expected to assist in boarding, in conjunction with
several seamen from each gun, who are armed with pistols and pikes,
and called boarders.

The great disparity of numbers between the crew of a merchant ship
and that of a man of war, occasions a difference in their internal
arrangements and mode of life, scarcely conceivable by those who have
not seen both. This is seen throughout, from the act of rousing the
hands in the morning to that of taking in sail. In the merchantman,
the watch below is called up by a few strokes of the handspike on
the forecastle; in the man of war, by the boatswain and his mates.
The boatswain is a petty officer, of considerable importance in his
way; he and his mates carry a small silver whistle or pipe, suspended
from the neck by a small cord. He receives word from the officer of
the watch to call the hands up. You immediately hear a sharp, shrill
whistle; this is succeeded by another and another from his mates.
Then follows his hoarse, rough cry of “All hands ahoy!” which is
forthwith repeated by his mates. Scarcely has this sound died upon
the ear, before the cry of “Up all hammocks ahoy!” succeeds it,
to be repeated in like manner. As the first tones of the whistle
penetrate between decks, signs of life make their appearance. Rough,
uncouth forms are seen tumbling out of their hammocks on all sides,
and before its last sounds have died upon the air, the whole company
of sleepers are hurriedly preparing for the duties of the day. No
delay is permitted, for as soon as the before-mentioned officers have
uttered their imperative commands, they run below, each armed with
a rope’s end, with which they belabor the shoulders of any luckless
wight upon whose eyes sleep yet hangs heavily, or whose slow-moving
limbs show him to be but half awake.

With a rapidity which would surprise a landsman, the crew dress
themselves, lash their hammocks and carry them on deck, where they
are stowed for the day. There is system even in this arrangement;
every hammock has its appropriate place. Below, the beams are all
marked, each hammock is marked with a corresponding number, and
in the darkest night, a sailor will go unhesitatingly to his own
hammock. They are also kept exceeding clean. Every man is provided
with two, so that while he is scrubbing and cleaning one, he may have
another to use. Nothing but such precautions could enable so many men
to live in so small a space.

A similar rapidity attends the performance of every duty. The word
of command is given in the same manner, and its prompt obedience
enforced by the same unceremonious rope’s-end. To skulk is therefore
next to impossible; the least tardiness is rebuked by the cry of
“Hurrah my hearty! bear a hand! heave along! heave along!” This
system of driving is far from being agreeable; it perpetually reminds
you of your want of liberty; it makes you feel, sometimes, as if the
hardest crust, the most ragged garments, with the freedom of your own
native hills, would be preferable to John Bull’s “beef and duff,”
joined as it is with the rope’s-end of the driving boatswain.

We had one poor fellow, an Irishman, named Billy Garvy, who felt very
uneasy and unhappy. He was the victim of that mortifying system of
impressment, prevalent in Great Britain in time of war. He came on
board perfectly unacquainted with the mysteries of sea life. One of
his first inquiries was, where he should find his bed, supposing they
slept on shipboard on beds the same as on shore. His messmates, with
true sailor roguishness, sent him to the boatswain. “And where shall
I find a bed, sir?” asked he of this rugged son of the ocean.

The boatswain looked at him very contemptuously for a moment, then,
rolling his lump of tobacco into another apartment of his ample
mouth, replied,

“Have you got a knife?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, stick it into the softest plank in the ship, and take that for
a bed!”

Poor fellow! what was sport for others was pain to him. He had been
used to kind treatment at home. After he had received his hammock,
when turning out in the morning, with the boatswain’s mates at his
heels, he used to exclaim, “When I was at home, I would walk in
my father’s garden in the morning, until the maid would come and
say, ‘William, will you come to your ta, or your coffee ta, or your
chocolarata?’ But, oh! the case is altered now; it’s nothing but bear
a hand, lash and carry. Oh, dear!”

I confess that Billy Garvy was not the only one who contrasted
the present with the past, or who found the balance to be greatly
in favor of the former. I often looked back to the village of
Bladen, and thought how preferable would be the bright hearth-side
and pleasant voices of that quiet home, to the profane, rough,
uncomfortable life we led on shipboard. As these reflections were
anything but pleasurable, I banished them as quickly as possible,
with a determination to be as happy as I could in my station
of servant to the surgeon of His Britannic Majesty’s frigate
_Macedonian_: a resolution which I commend to all lads, who, like me,
are foolish enough to quit the quiet scenes of a native village, for
the noisy, profane atmosphere of a man of war.

As our fare was novel and so different from shore living, it was some
time before I could get fully reconciled to it: it was composed of
hard sea biscuit, fresh beef while in port, but salt pork and salt
beef at sea, pea soup and burgoo. Burgoo, or, as it was sportively
called, skillagallee, was oatmeal boiled in water to the consistency
of hasty pudding. Sometimes we had cocoa instead of burgoo. Once a
week we had flour and raisins served out, with which we made “duff”
or pudding. To prepare these articles, each mess had its cook, who
drew the provisions, made the duff, washed the mess kids, etc. He
also drew the grog for the mess, which consisted of a gill of rum
mixed with two gills of water for each man. This was served out at
noon every day: at four o’clock, P. M., each man received half a pint
of wine. The boys only drew half this quantity, but were allowed pay
for the remainder, a regulation which could have been profitably
applied to the whole supply of grog and wine for both boys and men.
But those were not days in which Temperance triumphed as she does
now; though, I believe, the British navy has not yet ceased to
dispense the “drink that’s in the drunkard’s bowl” to her seamen.

Shortly after our captain came on board, his servant died somewhat
suddenly, so that I had an early opportunity of seeing how sailors
are disposed of in this sad hour. The corpse was laid out on the
grating, covered with a flag; as we were yet in the river, the body
was taken on shore and buried, without the beautiful burial-service
of the church of England being read at his grave--a ceremony which
is not omitted at the interment of the veriest pauper in that country.

I have purposely dwelt on these particulars, that the reader may feel
himself initiated at once into the secrets of man-of-war usages. He
has doubtless seen ships of war with their trim rigging and frowning
ports, and his heart has swelled with pride as he has gazed upon
these floating cities--the representatives of his nation’s character
in foreign countries: to their internal arrangements, however, he
has been a stranger. I have endeavored to introduce him into the
interior: a desire to make him feel at home there, is my apology for
dwelling so long on these descriptions.

After various delays, we were at last ready for sea and under sailing
orders. The tide and wind were both propitious; then came the
long-expected cry of the boatswain, “All hands up anchor ahoy!” The
crew manned the capstan in a trice, and running round to the tune of
a lively air played by the fifer, the huge anchor rapidly left the
mud of the Thames, and hung at the bows of our taut frigate. Then
came the cry of “All hands make sail ahoy!” As if by magic, she was
immediately covered with canvas; the favoring breeze at once filled
our sails, and the form that had lain for weeks inert and motionless
on the waters, now bounded along the waves like a thing of life.
Rapidly we ran down the Channel, and before we had well got under
weigh came to an anchor again at Spithead, under shelter of the
garden of England--the Isle of Wight.

Short as was the period between weighing anchor off Gravesend and our
arrival at Spithead, it gave opportunity for one of those occurrences
which are a disgrace to the naval service of any nation, and a
degradation to our common humanity, which the public opinion of the
civilized world should frown out of existence: I allude to the brutal
practice of flogging.

A poor fellow had fallen into the very sailorlike offence of getting
drunk. For this the captain sentenced him to the punishment of four
dozen lashes. He was first placed in _irons_ all night: the irons
used for this purpose were shackles fitting round the ankles, through
the ends of which was passed an iron bar some ten or twelve feet in
length: it was thus long because it was no unfrequent case for half a
dozen men to be ironed at once. A padlock at the end of the bar held
the prisoner securely. Thus placed in “duress vile,” he was guarded
by a marine until the captain bade the first lieutenant prepare the
hands to witness the punishment. Upon this the lieutenant transmitted
the order to the master at arms. He then ordered the grating or hatch
full of square holes to be rigged: it was placed accordingly between
the main and spar decks, not far from the mainmast.

While these preparations were going on, the officers were dressing
themselves in full uniform and arming themselves with their dirks:
the prisoner’s messmates carried him his best clothes, to make him
appear in as decent a manner as possible. This is always done, in
the hope of moving the feelings of the captain favorably towards the
prisoner.

This done, the hoarse, dreaded cry of “All hands ahoy to witness
punishment!” from the lips of the boatswain, peals along the ship
as mournfully as the notes of a funeral knell. At this signal the
officers muster on the spar deck, the men on the main deck. Next came
the prisoner; guarded by a marine on one side and the master at arms
on the other, he was marched up to the grating. His back was made
bare and his shirt laid loosely upon his back; the two quartermasters
proceeded to seize him up; that is, they tied his hands and feet with
spun-yarns, called the seizings, to the grating. The boatswain’s
mates, whose office it is to flog on board a man of war, stood ready
with their dreadful weapon of punishment, the cat-o’-nine-tails. This
instrument of torture was composed of nine cords, a quarter of an
inch round and about two feet long, the ends whipt with fine twine.
To these cords was affixed a stock, two feet in length, covered
with red baize. The reader may be sure that it is a most formidable
instrument in the hands of a strong, skilful man. Indeed, any man who
should whip his horse with it would commit an outrage on humanity,
which the moral feeling of any community would not tolerate; he would
be prosecuted for cruelty; yet it is used to whip MEN on board ships
of war!

The boatswain’s mate is ready, with coat off and whip in hand. The
captain gives the word. Carefully spreading the cords with the
fingers of his left hand, the executioner throws the cat over his
right shoulder; it is brought down upon the now uncovered herculean
shoulders of the MAN. His flesh creeps--it reddens as if blushing
at the indignity; the sufferer groans; lash follows lash, until the
first mate, wearied with the cruel employment, gives place to a
second. Now two dozen of these dreadful lashes have been inflicted:
the lacerated back looks inhuman; it resembles roasted meat burnt
nearly black before a scorching fire; yet still the lashes fall; the
captain continues merciless. Vain are the cries and prayers of the
wretched man. “I would not forgive the Saviour,” was the blasphemous
reply of one of these naval demi-gods, or rather demi-fiends, to a
plea for mercy. The executioners keep on. Four dozen strokes have cut
up his flesh and robbed him of all self-respect; there he hangs, a
pitied, self-despised, groaning, bleeding wretch; and now the captain
cries, forbear! His shirt is thrown over his shoulders; the seizings
are loosed; he is led away, staining his path with red drops of
blood, and the hands, “piped down” by the boatswain, sullenly return
to their duties.

Such was the scene witnessed on board the _Macedonian_, on the
passage from London to Spithead; such, substantially, is every
punishment scene at sea; only carried, sometimes, to a greater length
of severity. Sad and sorrowful were my feelings on witnessing it;
thoughts of the friendly warnings of my old acquaintance filled my
mind, and I inwardly wished myself once more under the friendly
roof of my father, at Bladen. Vain wish! I should have believed the
warning voice when it was given. Believe me, young man, you will
often breathe that wish, if ever you wander from a father’s house.

Flogging in the navy is more severe than in the army, though it is
too bad to be tolerated there, or indeed anywhere. Other modes of
punishment might be successfully substituted, which would deter from
misconduct, without destroying the self-respect of the man. I hope
the day will come, when a captain will no more be allowed to use
the “cat” than he is now to use poison. It should be an interdicted
weapon.

Though I have spoken severely of the officers of the navy, let it
not be thought that the whole class of naval officers are lost to
the finer feelings of humanity. There are many humane, considerate
men among them, who deserve our highest respect. This was the case
with the first lieutenant of the _Macedonian_, Mr. Scott. He abhorred
flogging. Once, when a poor marine was under sentence, he plead
hard and successfully with the captain for his respite. This was a
great victory; for the captain had a profound hatred of marines. The
poor soldier was extremely grateful for his intercession, and would
do anything for him to show his sense of the obligation; indeed,
the sailors, in their odd way, showed their preference for him by
describing him as a man who had a soul to be saved, and who ought to
go to heaven; while of the captain, they whispered that if he did not
go to perdition, “the devil would be cheated of his due.” These are,
in a manner, proverbial expressions of like and dislike, on board a
British man of war.

One of the effects of this exhibition of cruelty was seen during the
short time we lay at Spithead. The two boys, who were servants to the
first and second lieutenants, conceiving a special dislike to the
idea of being flogged, took it into their heads to run away. Being
sent on shore, they shaped their course for the country. It was well
for them that they were not re-taken.

Our frigate had orders to convey between two and three hundred troops
from Portsmouth to Lisbon, to assist the Portuguese against the
French. The soldiers were stowed on the main decks, with very few
conveniences for the voyage; their officers messed and berthed in the
ward-room. Having taken them on board, we again weighed anchor, and
were soon careering before the breeze on our way to Lisbon.

As usual, we who were landsmen had our share of that merciless,
nondescript, hateful, stultifying disease, yclept sea-sickness; as
usual, we wished the foolish wish that we had never come to sea; as
usual, we got over it, and laughed at ourselves for our sea-sick
follies. Our good ship paid little attention, however, to our
feelings; she kept along on her bounding way, and, after a week at
sea, we were greeted with the pleasant cry of “Land ho!” from the
mast-head. As it was now near night, we lay off and on until morning;
at day-break we fired a gun for a pilot. The wind being nearly dead
ahead, we had to beat about nearly all day. Towards night it became
fair, and we ascended the Tagus. This river is about nine miles wide
at its mouth, and is four hundred and fifty miles in length; it has
a very rapid current, with steep, fertile banks. Aided by a fine
breeze, we ascended it in splendid style, passed a half-moon battery,
then shot past Belem Castle into the port of Lisbon, about ten
miles from its mouth. Here we found a spacious harbor, filled with
shipping. Besides numerous merchantmen, there were two ships of a
hundred guns, several seventy-fours, frigates and sloops of war, with
a large number of transports; all designed for the defence of Lisbon
against the French.

Lisbon has a fine appearance from the harbor. A stranger, after a
long sea-voyage, while standing on the deck of his vessel, and gazing
on its battlements and towers, might fancy it to be a terrestrial
paradise; but, on landing, his admiration would certainly sink below
zero, as he plodded his way, beset by saucy beggars at almost every
step, through its narrow, filthy streets. Such, at least, was my
impression, as I perambulated the city. Among other things, I noticed
a great variety of churches and convents, which furnished swarms of
plump, good-natured friars, under whose spiritual domination the good
people of Lisbon were content to rest. I also counted thirteen large
squares. One of them contained a huge black horse, standing in its
centre, with the figure of a man upon his back, both much larger than
life. What this monument represented, I did not learn. That square is
denominated Black Horse Square.

On the day after our arrival, the _Macedonian_ was the scene of
considerable bustle. The troops, who seemed to forget their proximity
to a field of carnage, in the delight they felt at escaping from the
confinement on shipboard, were landed; several boats’ crews were also
sent up the river to assist in the defence of the place.

While we lay here, our ship was well supplied with fruits from the
shore. Large bunches of delicious grapes, abundance of sweet oranges,
water-melons, chestnuts, and also a bountiful supply of gigantic
onions, of peculiar flavor, enabled our crew to gratify their palates
in true English style. Poor fellows! they feasted, laughed, and
joked, as if the future had nothing to develop but fairy scenes of
unmixed delight. Little thought, indeed, does your true tar take of
the morrow.

Amid these feastings, however, there rose something to trouble
Macbeth, in the shape of an order from the admiral to prepare for a
cruise. This was peremptory;--for a cruise, therefore, we prepared.
Our boats’ crews came on board; the officers stored their larder with
the means of gustatory gratifications; and we stood out to sea again.

The port of Corunna, in Spain, was the next place at which we
anchored. While lying in this spacious and safe harbor, our little
world was thrown into temporary confusion by the loss of the
ward-room steward, Mr. Sanders. This man could speak in the Spanish
tongue; he had accumulated a considerable sum of money by long
service, prize money, and an economy little known among sailors.
For some cause or other he had become dissatisfied; so, one day, he
engaged a Spaniard to run his boat under the stern of our frigate;
dropping from one of the stern ports into the boat, unperceived
by the officers, the wily Spaniards covered him with their loose
garments and sails, and then conveyed him to the shore. This was
running a great risk; for had he been detected in the act, or taken
afterwards, he would have felt the cruel strokes of the lash.
Fortunately for himself, he escaped without detection.

From Corunna, we returned to Lisbon, where, at the cheerful cry of
“All hands bring the ship to an anchor, ahoy!” we once more placed
our frigate, taut and trim, under the battlements of the city.

As servant to the surgeon, it was one part of my duty to perform the
task of carrying his clothes to be washed. As great attention to
cleanliness, in frequently changing their linen, is observed among
naval officers, a good washerwoman is considered quite a desideratum.
In attending to this matter for my master, I had frequent
opportunities to go on shore. This gave me some means of observation.
On one of my visits to our pretty laundress, I saw several Portuguese
running along, gesticulating and talking with great earnestness.
Being ignorant of their language, my washerwoman, who spoke good
English, told me that a man had been stabbed, in consequence of
some ground for jealousy, afforded by the conduct of the deceased.
Hastening to the spot, I saw the wounded man, stretched out on a bed,
with two gaping wounds in his side, the long knife, the instrument of
the deed, lying by his side. The poor sufferer soon died. What was
done to the murderer, I could not discover.

Though very passionate, and addicted to the use of the knife, for the
purpose of taking summary vengeance, the Portuguese are nevertheless
arrant cowards. Indeed, it is a question by no means settled, whether
all classes of men, in any country, who fly to cold steel or to
fire-arms in every petty quarrel, are not cowards at heart. We had
an evidence of Portuguese cowardice in an affray which occurred
between some of the citizens of Lisbon and a party of our marines.
Six of the latter, ignorant of the palace or municipal regulations,
wandered into the queen’s gardens. Some twenty of the Portuguese, on
witnessing this bold intrusion on the privacy of the queen, rushed
upon them with long knives. The marines, though so inferior in
number, faced about with their bayonets, and, after much cursing and
chattering, their enemies, considering perhaps that the better part
of valor is discretion, took to their heels, leaving the six marines
masters of a bloodless field. These recontres were quite common
between them and our men; the result, though sometimes more serious,
was uniformly the same.

As an illustration of the manners of this people, I cannot forbear
the insertion of another fact. I was one day walking leisurely
along the streets, quite at my ease, when the gathering of a noisy
multitude arrested my attention. Looking up, I was shocked at seeing
a human head, with a pair of hands beneath it, nailed to a pole!
They had just been taken from the body of a barber, who, when in
the act of shaving a gentleman, was seized with a sudden desire to
possess a beautiful watch, which glittered in his pocket; to gain
this brilliant bauble, the wretched man cut his victim’s throat.
He was arrested, his hands were cut off, then his head, and both
were fastened to the pole as I have described them. Upon inquiry, I
ascertained that this was the ordinary method of punishing murder
in Portugal; a striking evidence that civilization had not fully
completed its great work among them. Civilization humanizes the
feelings of society, throwing a veil of refinement and mercy over
even the sterner acts of justice; at any rate, it never tolerates
such barbarism as I saw at Lisbon.

While in port we experienced a change of officers by no means
agreeable to the crew. Mr. Scott, our first lieutenant, an amiable
man, decidedly hostile to the practice of flogging, left us; for
what cause, we could not ascertain. His successor, Mr. Hope, though
bearing a very pleasant name, was an entirely different person, in
manners and conduct, from his predecessor. He was harsh, severe,
and fond of seeing the men flogged. Of course, floggings became
more frequent than before; for, although a lieutenant cannot flog
upon his own authority, yet, such is the influence he exerts
over a captain, that he has the utmost opportunity to gratify a
thirst for punishment. It may appear strange to the reader that
any gentleman--and all officers of the navy consider themselves
_gentlemen_--should possess such a thirst; yet such was the case with
Mr. Hope. Nor was his a solitary example; many a man, who, on shore,
in presence of ladies of fashion, appeared too gentle to harm an
enemy, too kind to injure an insect, was strangely metamorphosed into
a genuine unprincipled tyrant, upon assuming command in a man of war.

We had already witnessed a number of punishments, especially at
sea: in port, the officers were more condescending, lest their men
should desert; but at sea, when this was impossible, they flogged
without mercy. Cases of offence which occurred while in the harbor,
were looked up; sometimes a half dozen were flogged at once; every
man trembled lest he should be a victim; the ship’s crew were made
wretched; a sword seemed impending over every head. Who, in such
a case, could be happy? Not even a sailor, with all his habitual
thoughtlessness. Yet it is said we must flog, to maintain discipline
among sailors. Pshaw! Flogging may be needful to awe a slave writhing
under a sense of unmerited wrong, but never should a lash fall on a
freeman’s back, especially if he holds the safety and honor of his
country in his keeping.

Poor old Bob Hammond! Never was man more reckless than this
honest-hearted Irishman; never was sailor more courageous under
punishment. For being drunk he received four dozen lashes; he bore
the infliction with profound silence, uttering neither groan nor
sigh; neither casting one imploring look at his tormentors. On being
taken down, he applied himself most lustily to his bottle, and before
night was drunk again. Rushing to the quarter deck, with a madness
peculiar to a phrensied drunkard, he ran up against the captain with
such force that he nearly knocked him down. With a boldness that
seemed to strike the great man dumb, Bob hiccupped and said,

“Halloo, Billy, my boy, is that you? You are young and foolish; just
fit for the launch. You are like a young lion--all your sorrows are
to come.”

The captain was excessively proud; even his officers scarcely dared
walk the quarter deck on the same side with him. He never allowed
himself to be addressed but by his title of “my Lord.” Should a
sailor, through design or forgetfulness, reply to a command, “Yes,
sir,” the lordly man would look at him with a glance full of dignity,
and sternly reply, “What, sir?” This, of course, would put the
offender in mind to correct himself by saying, “Yes, my _Lord_.”
Judge then of his surprise, indignation, nay, of his lordly horror,
when poor old drunken Bob Hammond called him “Billy, my boy!”
Doubtless it stirred up his nobility within him, for, with a voice
of thunder, he exclaimed, “Put this man in irons!” It was done. The
next morning, his back yet sore, poor Bob received five dozen more
strokes of the hated cat-o’-nine-tails. Most heroically was it borne.
No sound escaped him; the most profound silence was observed by all,
broken only by the dead sound of the whip, as it fell every few
moments on the wounded back. The scene was sickening in the extreme.
Let me throw a veil over its details, simply remarking that it is
questionable which of the two appears to the best advantage; poor
drunken Bob, suffering degrading torture with heroic firmness, or my
Lord Fitzroy, gloating on the scene with the appetite of a vulture!
Let the reader decide for himself.

These statements may at first sight appear incredible. It may be
asked how a man could endure whippings which would destroy an ox or a
horse. This is a very natural question, and but for the consciousness
I feel of being supported in my statements by the universal testimony
of old men-of-war’s-men, I should hesitate to publish them. The
_worst_ species of this odious torture, however, remains to be
described--flogging through the fleet.

This punishment is never inflicted without due trial and sentence
by a court-martial, for some aggravated offence. After the offender
is thus sentenced, and the day arrives appointed by his judges for
its execution, the unhappy wretch is conducted into the ship’s
launch--a large boat--which has been previously rigged up with poles
and grating, to which he is seized up; he is attended by the ship’s
surgeon, whose duty it is to decide when the power of nature’s
endurance has been taxed to its utmost. A boat from every ship in
the fleet is also present, each carrying one or two officers and two
marines fully armed. These boats are connected by tow lines to the
launch.

These preparations made, the crew of the victim’s ship are ordered
to man the rigging, while the boatswain commences the tragedy. When
he has administered one, two or three dozen lashes, according to the
number of ships in the fleet, the prisoner’s shirt is thrown over his
gory back; the boatswain returns on board, the hands are piped down,
the drummer beats a mournful melody, called the rogue’s march, and
the melancholy procession moves on. Arriving at the side of another
ship, the brutal scene is repeated, until every crew in the fleet has
witnessed it, and from one to three hundred lashes have lacerated
the back of the broken-spirited tar to a bleeding pulp. He is then
placed under the surgeon’s care, to be fitted for duty--_a ruined
man_--broken in spirit! all sense of self-respect gone, forever
gone! If he survive, it is only to be like his own brave bark,
when winds and waves conspire to dash her on the pitiless strand,
a wretched, hopeless wreck; a living, walking shadow of his former
self. Shameful blot! most foul and disgraceful stain on the humanity
of England! How long before this worse than barbarism will disappear
before the mild influences of civilization and Christianity?

No plea of necessity can be successfully urged in behalf of whipping
men; for, if subordination or faithful adhesion to orders is expected
to follow such terrible examples, I know, from my acquaintance
with the sufferers themselves, that the expectation is vain. One
of two results always follows. The victim either lives on, a lone,
dark-minded, broken-spirited man, despising himself and hating
every one, because he thinks every one hates him; or he lives with
one fearful, unyielding purpose; a purpose on which he feeds and
nourishes his galled mind, as food affords life and energy to his
physical constitution--that purpose is REVENGE. I have heard them
swear--and the wild flashing eye, the darkly frowning brow, told
how firm was that intent--that if ever they should be in battle,
they would shoot their officers. I have seen them rejoice over the
misfortunes of their persecutors, but more especially at their death.
That it has frequently led to mutiny, is well verified. I have known
such severity to result in actual murder. While we lay at Lisbon, a
sergeant of marines, on board a seventy-four, made himself obnoxious
by repeated acts of tyranny. Two marines determined upon his death.
One night, unperceived by any, they seized him, hurried him to the
gangway, and pitched him overboard. The tide was running strong; the
man was drowned! But for themselves his fate would have remained
a secret until the great day of judgment; it was discovered by an
officer, who accidentally overheard them congratulating each other on
their achievement. He betrayed them. A court-martial sentenced them.
They were placed on deck with halters on their necks. Two guns were
fired, and, when the smoke cleared away, two men were seen dangling
from the foreyard-arm. Only one day previous, a letter had brought
a discharge from the service for one of them. Poor fellow! it came
too late. He was fated to a summary discharge from all service, in a
manner appalling and repulsive to every finer human feeling.

Such are the actual consequences of severity of discipline on board
men of war. Punishment leads to revenge; revenge to punishment. What
is intended to cure, only aggravates the disease; the evil enlarges
under the remedy; _voluntary_ subordination ceases; gloom overspreads
the crew; fear fills the breasts of the officers; the ship becomes
a miniature of the house of fiends. While, on the other hand, mild
regulations, enforced without an appeal to brute force, are easily
carried into operation. The sailor has a warm heart; show him
personal kindness, treat him as a man, he will then be a man; he will
do anything for a _kind_ officer. He will peril his life for him;
nay, he will cheerfully rush between him and danger. This was done
at Tripoli, when the brave James[3] offered his own arm to receive
the fell stroke of a Turkish scimitar, aimed at the life of the bold
Decatur, on board the frigate _Philadelphia_. Let naval officers,
let all ship-masters, once fairly test the effect of kind treatment,
and I am sure they will never desire to return to severity; unless,
indeed, they are tyrants at heart, in which case, the sooner they
lose their commands the better for their country; for no tyrant is
truly brave or trustworthy. Cowardice and meanness lie curled up in
the heart of every tyrant. He is too despicable, too unsafe to be
trusted with the responsibilities of a naval command. Such, at least,
is the opinion of an old sailor.

One of the greatest enemies to order and happiness in ships of war is
drunkenness. To be drunk is considered by almost every sailor as the
_acme_ of sensual bliss; while many fancy that swearing and drinking
are necessary accomplishments in a genuine man-of-war’s-man. Hence
it almost universally prevails. In our ship the men would get drunk,
in defiance of every restriction. Were it not for the moral and
physical ruin which follows its use, one might laugh at the various
contrivances adopted to elude the vigilance of officers in their
efforts to procure rum. Some of our men who belonged to the boats’
crews provided themselves with bladders; if left ashore by their
officers a few moments, they would slip into the first grocery, fill
their bladders, and return with the spoil. Once by the ship’s side,
the favorable moment was seized to pass the interdicted bladders into
the port-holes, to some watchful shipmate, by whom it was carefully
secreted, to be drunk at the first opportunity. The liberty to go on
shore, which is always granted while in port, was sure to be abused
for drunken purposes. The Sabbath was also a day of sensuality. True,
we sometimes had the semblance of religious services, when the men
were summoned aft to hear the captain read the morning service from
the church prayer-book; but usually it was observed more as a day
of revelry than of worship. But at Christmas our ship presented a
scene such as I had never imagined. The men were permitted to have
their “full swing.” Drunkenness ruled the ship. Nearly every man,
with most of the officers, was in a state of beastly intoxication at
night. Here, some were fighting, but were so insensibly drunk, they
hardly knew whether they struck the guns or their opponents; yonder,
a party were singing libidinous or bacchanalian songs, while all
were laughing, cursing, swearing or hallooing; confusion reigned in
glorious triumph; it was the very chaos of humanity. Had we been at
sea, a sudden gale of wind must have proved our destruction; had we
been exposed to a sudden attack from an enemy’s vessel, we should
have fallen an easy prey to the victor; just as the poor Hessians,
at Trenton, fell before the well-timed blow of the sage Washington,
during the war of the revolution.

Of all places, the labors of temperance men are most needed among
sailors; and I am glad to know that much has been accomplished among
them already. From what I _know_ of the sufferings and difficulties
growing out of intemperance at sea, I most heartily desire to see
a temperance flag floating at the mast-head of every ship in the
world. When this is seen, sailors will be a happier class than ever
they have yet been, from the time when the cautious Phenicians crept
timidly round the shores of the Mediterranean, to the present day of
bold and fearless navigation.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                             CHAPTER III


Shortly after the Christmas debauch, mentioned in the preceding
chapter, news was brought to the admiral that nine French
frigates were cruising on the Spanish coast: immediately, all was
excitement, bustle, preparation through the fleet. The _Hannibal_
and _Northumberland_, both seventy-four gun ships, the _Cæsar_ of
eighty guns, called by the sailors the Old Bull-dog, a gun brig, and
some others, I forget the names, and the _Macedonian_, were ordered
to sail in pursuit of the French. This formidable force dropped
down the river, every man composing it eagerly desiring to meet the
enemy. The enterprise however, was unsuccessful; after cruising in
vain for several days, the admiral signalled the fleet to return.
Before reaching port we fell in with a Scotch ship from Greenock,
in a most perilous condition; her masts and rudder were gone, while
her numerous leaks were fast gaining on the labors of the already
exhausted crew at the pumps. Finding it utterly impossible to save
the vessel, we took off the crew; and thus our cruise, though
defeated in its main design, proved the means of rescuing several
poor wretches from a watery grave. It is a question worthy of
consideration, whether this was not a really higher result than if
we had found and beaten the French, and had returned in a crippled
state, leaving some hundreds killed and wounded. Humanity would
answer, yea.

So far as the effects of this cruise concerned our own little
frigate, they were really quite serious. We were reefing topsails
one night, at sea, when the sailing-master, Mr. Lewis, in a fit of
ill-humor, threatened to flog some of the men. The captain overheard
him. Feeling himself hurt by this assumption of his own prerogative,
he told Mr. Lewis that he was captain in the ship, and it was his
business to flog the men. Sharp words followed; the captain was
exasperated; he ordered the sailing-master to be put in irons. Here,
however, he exceeded his own power, for, though he might place
the common sailor in irons, he might not do so by an officer with
impunity. Accordingly, when we reached Lisbon, a court-martial sat on
the case, which resulted in their both being broken or cashiered.

This was a hard blow for Lord Fitzroy, and he obviously felt it
most keenly. It also cut off my expectations of being elevated to
the quarter deck; for, although I had never received any direct
encouragement from his Lordship, yet I had always nourished the hope
that ultimately he would keep the promise he made to my mother,
and do something for my advancement. Now, however, my hopes were
destroyed. I was doomed to the forecastle for life.

Lord Fitzroy was succeeded by Captain Carson. He however, was soon
removed to make way for Captain Waldegrave, who proved to be far more
severe than Fitzroy. He and Lieutenant Hope were kindred spirits:
cruelty seemed to be their delight, for at the presence of culprits
tied to the gratings, a gleam of savage animation stole over their
faces. Punishment was now an almost every-day scene; even the boys
were not permitted to escape. A lad was appointed boatswain over
them, and they were consigned to the care of Mr. Hope, who took
especial delight in seeing them flogged. What a mean, dastardly
spirit for a British officer! How utterly contemptible he appears
engaged in whipping a few helpless sailor boys! Yet thus he did
constantly appear, causing them to be flogged for every trifling
offence. One poor little fellow, unable to tolerate the thought of
the lash, hid himself in the cable tier for several days. He was
discovered, only to be most shamefully punished.

These severities filled our crew with discouragement. A sailor
dreads the dishonor of the lash. Some, urged by a nice sense of
honor, have preferred death to its endurance. I have heard of one
man who actually loaded himself with shot and deliberately walked
overboard. Among our ship’s company the effects of these severe
measures showed themselves in frequent desertions, notwithstanding
the great risk run by such a bold measure; for, if taken, they were
sure to meet with a fearful retribution. Still, many preferred the
chance of freedom; some ran off when on shore with the boats, others
dropped overboard in the night, and either swam on shore or were
drowned. Many others were kept from running away by the strength of
their attachment to their old messmates and by the hope of better
days. Of those who escaped, some were retaken by the Portuguese,
who delighted to hunt them up for a small sum of money. Two of my
messmates, named Robert Bell and James Stokes, were taken in this
manner. I felt greatly affected at losing their company, for they
were pleasant fellows. I felt a peculiar attachment to poor Stokes;
he had taught me many things which appertain to seamanship, and had
cared for my interests with the faithfulness of a parent. O how
anxiously did I desire they might not be detected, because I knew,
if they were, that they were doomed men. But they were taken by a
band of armed Portuguese; barefooted, desponding, broken in spirit,
they were brought on board, only to be put in irons immediately. By a
fortunate chance they escaped with _fifty_ lashes, instead of being
flogged through the fleet.

We had another man who escaped, named Richard Suttonwood; he was very
profane, and was much in the habit of using the word “bloody;” hence
he was nicknamed “Bloody Dick” by his shipmates. Well, Dick ran off.
He succeeded in getting on board an English brig in the merchant
service. But how chop-fallen was poor Dick when he found that this
brig was laden with powder for his own frigate! Resolving to make the
best of the matter, he said nothing of his relation to our frigate,
but as soon as the brig dropped alongside of the _Macedonian_, he
came on board and surrendered himself; by this means he escaped
being flogged, as it was usual to pardon a runaway who voluntarily
returned to his duty. The crew were all delighted at his return, as
he was quite popular among them for his lively disposition and his
talents as a comic singer, which last gift is highly prized in a man
of war. So joyous were we all at his escape from punishment, that we
insisted on his giving a concert, which went off well. Seated on a
gun surrounded by scores of the men, he sung a variety of favorite
songs, amid the plaudits and _encores_ of his rough auditors.

By such means as these, sailors contrive to keep up their spirits
amidst constant causes of depression and misery. One is a good
singer, another can spin tough forecastle yarns, while a third can
crack a joke with sufficient point to call out roars of laughter. But
for these interludes, life in a man of war, with severe officers,
would be absolutely intolerable; mutiny or desertion would mark the
voyages of every such ship. Hence, officers in general highly value
your jolly, merry-making, don’t-care sort of seamen. They know the
effect of their influence in keeping away discontented thought from
the minds of a ship’s company. One of these official favorites paid
our frigate a visit while we lay in Lisbon. We had just finished
breakfast, when a number of our men were seen running in high glee
towards the main hatchway. Wondering what was going forward, I
watched their proceedings with a curious eye. The cause of their joy
soon appeared in the person of a short, round-faced, merry-looking
tar, who descended the hatchway amid cries of “Hurrah! here’s happy
Jack!” As soon as the jovial little man had set his foot on the berth
deck, he began a specimen of his vocal powers. The voice of song was
as triumphant on board the _Macedonian_, as it was in days of yore
in the halls of Ossian. Every voice was hushed, all work was brought
to a standstill, while the crew gathered round their favorite,
in groups, to listen to his unequalled performances. Happy Jack
succeeded, while his visit lasted, in communicating his own joyous
feelings to our people, and they parted from him at night with deep
regret.

A casual visitor in a man of war, beholding the song, the dance, the
revelry of the crew, might judge them to be happy. But I know that
these things are often resorted to, because they feel miserable,
just to drive away dull care. They do it on the same principle as
the slave population in the South, to drown in sensual gratification
the voice of misery that groans in the inner man--that lives within,
speaking of the indignity offered to its high nature by the chain
that eats beyond the flesh--discoursing of the rights of man, of
liberty on the free hills of a happier clime: while amidst the gayest
negro dance, not a heart among the laughing gang but would beat with
high emotions and seize the boon with indescribable avidity, should
it be offered its freedom on the spot. So in a man of war, where
severe discipline prevails, though cheerfulness smiles at times, it
is only the forced merriment of minds ill at ease; minds that would
gladly escape the thraldom of the hated service to which they are
bound.

Nor is this forced submission to circumstances universal. There are
individuals who cannot be reached by these pleasantries; in spite of
everything, their spirits will writhe under the gripe of merciless
authority. We had a melancholy instance of this species of mind on
board our frigate. His name was Hill, the ward-room steward. This
man came on board with a resolute purpose to give satisfaction, if
possible, to his superiors. He tried his utmost in vain. He was still
scolded and cursed, until his condition seemed unendurable. One
morning a boy entered the after ward-room, when the first object that
met his astonished eye was the body of the steward, all ghastly and
bleeding. He had cut his throat, and lay weltering in his gore. The
surgeon was called, who pronounced him to be yet alive. The wound was
sewed up, the poor sufferer carried to the hospital-ship, which was
in attendance on the fleet, where he recovered, to be returned to
his former ship, though in another and worse capacity, that of common
sailor.

We had on board a colored man whose name was Nugent, who possessed
a remarkably fine person, was very intelligent, exceedingly polite
in his manners, and easy in his address. He soon grew weary of the
caprices of our officers, and ran away. He was taken, however, in
rather a curious manner. The officers frequently walked the deck with
their spy-glasses. As one of them was spending a few leisure moments
in looking at the surrounding shipping, what should appear within
the field of his glass, but the person of the fugitive Nugent on the
deck of an American vessel! Upon this, a boat was despatched, which
soon returned with the crestfallen deserter, who was unceremoniously
thrown into irons. By some fortunate chance, however, he escaped a
flogging.

Of course, my situation was as unpleasant as that of any other
person on board. I could not witness the discomfort and ill-usage
of others, without trembling for my own back. I, too, had thoughts
of running away, as opportunities frequently offered themselves.
But, being ignorant of the Portuguese language, I wisely concluded
that my condition among them, if I got clear, would, in respect to
my present state, bear about the same analogy as the fire does to
the frying-pan. My little adventures on shore gave me full assurance
of this fact. I remember going ashore on Good Friday. Like good
Catholics, the Portuguese had the masts of their vessels crossed,
with effigies of the traitor Judas hanging very significantly at
their jib-booms. On shore, they were exhibiting the blasphemous
mimicry of the solemn scene of the crucifixion. One was bearing
the cross, another a sponge, a third the vinegar. The streets were
crowded with images of the saints, to which all reverently bowed.
Woe betide that sacrilegious wretch who refused this tribute to
their darling images. He _was_ sure of being knocked down; he was
_not_ sure of getting home alive. I was fain to yield my knees to
save my skull; so for the time I was as good a Catholic as any of
them, at least in the matter of bowing and crossing: it was done,
however, with true Protestant mental reservation, and with a sincere
determination to prefer my man-of-war’s life to a life in Portugal.

On another occasion, some of our officers took me on shore to help
them attend to some purchases. After following them a considerable
distance, they gave me a small commission to execute, with directions
to return to the ship as soon as it was attended to. This was no
easy task, however: they had conducted me to a strange part of the
city, and I knew scarcely a word of Portuguese. There I stood, then,
surrounded only by foreigners, who neither understood my language
nor I theirs. All I knew of my destination was, that our boat lay
near the Fish-market; so, for Fish-market I inquired. Speaking in
English, I asked the first man I met to direct me. He looked at me
with the empty stare of an idiot, and passed on. To the next, I said,
partly in broken Portuguese and partly in my own tongue, “John,”
(they call everybody John, whose true name they do not know,) “do
show me the fish-market.” He could not understand me; so, shrugging
his shoulders, he said, “No entender Englis,” and passed on. I asked
several others, but invariably received a shrug of the shoulder, a
shake of the head, and a “no entender Englis,” for an answer. I grew
desperate, and began to feel as if I had lost myself, when, to my
unutterable satisfaction, I saw an English soldier. I ran up to him
and said, “Good luck to you; do tell me where the fish-market is,
for these stupid Portuguese, bad luck to them, can’t understand a
word I say; but it is all, no entender Englis.” My countryman laughed
at seeing my English temper ruffled, and placed me in the way of
reaching the fish-market. I hurried thither, when, to my chagrin, the
boats were all gone. Here, then, was another difficulty; for, though
there were plenty of Portuguese boatmen, they could not understand
which ship I wished to reach. Here, however, my fingers did what my
tongue refused; our ship had its mainmast out, so, holding up two
fingers and pointing to the mast, they at last comprehended me and
conveyed me on board. Coming alongside, I gave them what I thought
was right; but they and I differed in opinion on that point; they
demanded more, with considerable bluster, but the sentry shouted,
“Shove off there!” and pointed his musket at them. Whether they
thought a reasonable fee, and a timely retreat, better than a contest
which might give them the taste of a musket-ball, I cannot determine;
at all events, I know that boat never left ship faster than theirs,
when they beheld the gleam of the sentry’s musket flashing in their
dark faces.

Just after this adventure, I came very near being flogged, to my
no small alarm. Happening on shore with two more of the officers’
servants, named Yates and Skinner, we stayed so late, the ship’s
boats had all gone off. Finding the boats gone, we strayed back into
the city; night came on, and our return until morning was impossible.
We had to wander about the city all night, in constant fear of
being apprehended by the Portuguese as deserters. To prevent this
no very desirable result, my comrades made me a midshipman; for the
satisfactory reason, that if an officer was supposed to be in our
company, no one would trouble us. The summary process by which I was
inducted into my new station, was by means of a stripe carefully
marked on my collar with a piece of chalk, to imitate the silver
lace on a middy’s coat. Thus exalted, I marched my company about
Lisbon until dawn, when I again found myself the self-same Samuel
Leech, servant to the surgeon of H. M. frigate _Macedonian_, that
I was the previous evening, with this additional fact, however, I
was now liable to be flogged. So, in the true spirit of a _Jeremy
Sneak_, we went on board, where, with due ceremony, we were parted
for separate examinations. What tale my fellow-wanderers invented, I
know not; for my own part, I told the truth of the matter, excepting
that I suppressed that part of it which related to my transformation
into an officer. Luckily for us all, one of the party was the first
lieutenant’s servant; if he flogged one, he must flog the whole. To
save the back of his own boy, he let us all escape.

We were now ordered on another cruise. Being in want of men, we
resorted to the press-gang which was made up of our most loyal men,
armed to the teeth; by their aid we obtained our full numbers. Among
them were a few Americans; they were taken without respect to their
protections, which were often taken from them and destroyed. Some
were released through the influence of the American consul; others,
less fortunate, were carried to sea, to their no small chagrin.[4]

The duties of the press-gang completed, we once more weighed anchor,
and were soon careering before the gales of the bay of Biscay. Our
reception in this proverbially stormy bay was by no means a civil
one. We met with an extraordinarily severe gale, in which we came
very near foundering. We had just finished dinner, when a tremendous
sea broke over us, pouring down the hatchway, sweeping the galley of
all its half-cooked contents, then being prepared for the officers’
dinner, and covering the berth deck with a perfect flood. It seemed
as if old Neptune really intended that wave to sink us to Davy Jones’
locker. As the water rolled from side to side within, and the rude
waves without beat against her, our good ship trembled from stem
to stern, and seemed like a human being gasping for breath in a
struggle with death. The women (there were several on board) set up
a shriek, a thing they had never done before; some of the men turned
pale; others cursed and tried to say witty things; the officers
started; orders ran along the ship to man the chain-pumps, and to cut
holes through the berth deck to let the water into the hold. These
orders being rapidly obeyed, the ship was freed from her danger. The
confusion of the moment was followed by laughing and pleasantries.
That gale was long spoken of as one of great danger.

It is strange that sailors, who see so much peril, should treat
religion with such neglect as it is usual for them to do. When danger
is imminent, they send up a cry for help; when it is past, they
rarely return a grateful thank-offering. Yet how truly and eloquently
has the Psalmist shown, in the 107th Psalm, what should be the moral
effect of the wonders of the deep. What but a deep-rooted spiritual
perversity prevents such an effect?

The next incident that disturbed the monotony of our sea-life, was of
a melancholy character. We had been giving chase to two West Indiamen
the whole of one Sabbath afternoon; at night it blew so hard we
had to reef top-sails; when a poor fellow, named John Thomson, was
knocked from the yard. In falling, he struck some part of the ship,
and the wave which opened to receive him, never disclosed his form
again. He was a pressed man, an American by birth, greatly beloved
by his messmates, by whom his death was as severely felt as when a
member of a family dies on shore. His loss created a dull and gloomy
atmosphere throughout the ship: it was several days before the hands
regained their wonted elasticity of mind and appearance.

My recollections of this cruise are very feeble and indistinct,
owing to a severe injury which confined me to my hammock nearly
the whole period. The accident which ended in a severe illness had
its origin in the following manner. The duty of cleaning knives,
plates, dish-covers, &c., for the ward-room, devolved alternately on
the boys employed in the ward-room. Having finished this task, one
day, in my regular turn, the ward-room steward, a little hot-headed
Malay, came to me at dinner-time to inquire for the knives. Not
recollecting for the moment, I made no reply; when he angrily pushed
me over a sack of bread. In falling my head came in contact with
the corner of a locker. Feeling much pain, and the blood flowing
freely, I went to Mr. Marsh, the surgeon’s mate, who dressed it,
and bade me take care of it. Probably it would have healed speedily
but for the freak of a sailor a few days after, while holy-stoning
the decks. By holy-stoning, I mean cleaning them with stones, which
are used for this purpose in men of war. These stones are, some of
them, large, with a ring at each end with a rope attached, by which
it is pulled backwards and forwards on the wet decks. These large
stones are called holy bibles; the smaller hand ones are also called
holy-stones, or prayer-books, their shape being something like a
book. After the decks are well rubbed with these stones, they are
wiped dry with swabs made of rope-yarns. By this means the utmost
cleanliness is preserved in the ship. It was customary in our ship,
during this scrubbing process, for the boys to wash themselves in
a large tub provided for the purpose on the main deck. The men
delighted in sousing us with water during this operation. After
being wounded, as just mentioned, I endeavored to avoid their briny
libations; but one morning, one of the sailors, seeing my anxiety,
crept slily up behind me, and emptied a pail of water directly
over my head. That night I began both to look and to feel sick. My
messmates said I was sea-sick, and laughed at me. Feeling violent
pains in my head, ears and neck, I felt relieved when it was time
to turn in. The next morning, being rather behind my usual time in
waiting upon the surgeon, he began to scold me. I told him I was
unwell. He felt my pulse, examined my tongue, and excused me. Growing
worse, my messmates got down my hammock. I entered it very sick; my
head and face swelling very large, and my eyes so sunken I could
scarcely see.

I remained in this sad situation several weeks, carefully attended by
the surgeon, and watched by the men as tenderly as their rough hands
could perform the office of nurse. My destiny was considered as being
sealed, both by the crew and by myself. I was much troubled at the
thought of dying: it seemed dark and dreary to enter the valley of
the shadow of death without the presence of a Saviour. To relieve my
feelings, I frequently repeated the Lord’s prayer, taught me by my
indulgent mother in my earlier and brighter years. But my mind was
dark and disconsolate; there were none among that kind-hearted but
profligate crew to point my soul to its proper rest.

While lying in this state, my life hanging in a doubtful balance, one
of the crew, named Black Tom, an African, was taken sick. His hammock
was hung up in the sick bay, a part of the main deck appropriated to
hospital purposes. Poor Tom, having a constitution already undermined
by former excesses, soon fell under the attack of disease. He was
then sewed up in his hammock, with some shot at his feet: at sundown
the ship’s bell pealed a melancholy note, the ship was “hove to,”
all hands mustered on deck, but myself; and, amid the most profound
silence, the body of the departed sailor was laid upon the grating
and launched into the great deep, the resting-place of many a bold
head. A plunge, a sudden opening in the water, followed by an equally
sudden return of the disparted waves, and Black Tom was gone forever
from his shipmates! In a few moments the yards were braced round, and
our frigate was cutting her way again through the wide ocean waste.
It seemed to me that she was soon destined to heave to again, that I
might also be consigned to an ocean grave. But in this I was happily
disappointed. By the blessing of a watchful Providence, the aid of
a sound constitution, assisted by the skill of our surgeon and the
kindness of my shipmates, I was at last able to leave my hammock.
Shortly after our return to Lisbon, I was pronounced fit for duty,
and the surgeon having obtained another boy, I was placed on the
quarter deck, in the capacity of messenger, or errand boy for the
captain and his officers.

With my return to active life, came my exposure to hardships, and,
what I dreaded still more, to punishment. Some of the boys were to be
punished on the main deck; the rest were ordered forward to witness
it, as usual. Being so far aft that I could not hear the summons,
as a matter of course, I remained at my post. The hawk-eye of the
lieutenant missed me, and in a rage he ordered me to be sent for to
receive a flogging for my absence. Excuse was vain; for, such was the
fiendish temper of this brutal officer, he only wanted the shadow of
a reason for dragging the poor helpless boys of his charge to the
grating. While I stood in trembling expectation of being degraded
by the hated cat, a summons from the captain providentially called
off our _brave_ boy-flogger, and I escaped. The _offence_ was never
mentioned afterwards. The reader can easily perceive how such a
constant exposure to the lash must embitter a seaman’s life.

Already, since the _Macedonian_ had been in commission, had she
changed captains twice. Why it so happened, it is not in my power
to explain; but while at Lisbon, after the cruise last mentioned,
our present captain was superseded by Captain John S. Carden. His
arrival excited a transitory hope of a brighter lot, as he was an
older man than the others, and, as we vainly trusted, a kinder one.
Here, however, we were mistaken; he was like all the rest, the same
heartless, unfeeling lover of whip discipline. At first the men under
sentence tried their powers at flattery with the grave old man; but
he was too experienced a sea-dog to be cajoled by a long-faced sailor
under sentence: when, therefore, they told him he was a kind-hearted
_fatherly_ gentleman, he only replied by a most provoking laugh, and
by saying they were a set of very undutiful sons.

Captain Carden was mercilessly severe in punishing theft. He would
on no account forgive any man for this crime, but would flog the
thief almost to death. Of this, we soon had a cruel instance. A
midshipman named Gale, a most rascally, unprincipled fellow, found
his pocket handkerchief in possession of one of the crew. He charged
the man with stealing it. It was in vain that the poor wretch
asserted that he found it under his hammock. He was reported as a
thief; a court-martial sat upon him, and returned the shamefully
disproportionate sentence of three hundred lashes through the fleet,
and one year’s imprisonment! Any of my shipmates who are living, will
certify to the truth of this statement, brutal and improbable as it
may appear.

Nor was that sentence a dead letter; the unhappy man endured it to
the letter. Fifty were laid on alongside of the _Macedonian_, in
conformity with a common practice of inflicting the most strokes
at the first ship, in order that the gory back of the criminal may
strike the more terror into the crews of the other ships. This poor
tortured man bore two hundred and twenty, and was pronounced by the
attending surgeon unfit to receive the rest. Galled, bruised, and
agonized as he was, he besought him to suffer the infliction of the
remaining eighty, that he might not be called to pass through the
degrading scene again; but this prayer was denied! He was brought on
board, and when his wounds were healed, the captain, Shylock-like,
determined to have the whole pound of flesh, ordered him to receive
the remainder.

But for my desire to present the reader with a true exhibition of
life on board a British man of war, it would be my choice to suppress
these disgusting details of cruelty and punishment. But this is
impossible; I must either draw a false picture or describe them. I
choose the latter, in the hope that giving publicity to these facts
will exert a favorable influence on the already improving discipline
of ships of war.

The case of our ship’s drummer will illustrate the hopelessness of
our situation under such officers as commanded our ship; it will
show that implicit, uncomplaining submission was our only resource.
This drummer, being seized up for some petty offence, demanded, what
no captain can refuse, to be tried by a court-martial; in the hope,
probably, of escaping altogether. The officers laughed among each
other, and when, a few days afterwards, the poor, affrighted man
offered to withdraw the demand and take six dozen lashes, they coolly
remarked, “The drummer is sick of his bargain.” He would have been
a wiser man had he never made it; for the court-martial sentenced
him to receive two hundred lashes through the fleet:--a punishment
ostensibly for his first offence, but really for his insolence (?) in
demanding a trial by court-martial. Such was the administration of
justice (?) on board the _Macedonian_.

“Why did not your crew rise in resistance to such cruelty?” is a
question which has often been proposed to me, when relating these
facts to my American friends. To talk of mutiny on shore is an easy
matter; but to excite it on shipboard is to rush on to certain death.
Let it be known that a man has dared to breathe the idea, and he is
sure to swing at the yard-arm. Some of our men once saw six mutineers
hanging at the yard-arm at once, in a ship whose crew exhibited
the incipient beginnings of mutiny. Let mutiny be successful, the
government will employ its whole force, if needful, in hunting
down the mutineers; their blood, to the last drop, is the terrible
retribution it demands for this offence. That demand is sure to be
met, as was the case with the crew of the _Hermione_[5] frigate, and
with the crew of the ill-fated _Bounty_, whose history is imprinted
on the memory of the whole civilized world. With such tragedies
flitting before our eyes, who need ask why we did not resist?

Just before we left Lisbon for another cruise, my position was
once more changed by my appointment to the post of servant to the
sailing-master; whose boy, for some offence or other, was flogged and
turned away. Here, too, the captain procured a fine band, composed
of Frenchmen, Italians and Germans, taken by the Portuguese from a
French vessel. These musicians consented to serve, on condition of
being excused from fighting, and on a pledge of exemption from being
flogged. They used to play to the captain during his dinner hour;
the party to be amused usually consisting of the captain and one
or two invited guests from the ward-room; except on Sundays, when
he chose to honor the ward-room with his august presence. The band
then played for the ward-room. They also played on deck whenever we
entered or left a port. On the whole, their presence was an advantage
to the crew, since their spirit-stirring strains served to spread
an occasional cheerful influence over them. Soon after they came on
board, we had orders to proceed to sea again on another cruise.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                              CHAPTER IV


A few days after we had fairly got out to sea, the thrilling cry of
“A man overboard!” ran through the ship with electrical effect; it
was followed by another cry of, “Heave out a rope!” then by still
another, of “Cut away the life buoy!” Then came the order, “Lower
a boat!” Notwithstanding the rapidity of these commands, and the
confusion occasioned by the anticipated loss of a man, they were
rapidly obeyed. The ship was then hove to. But that time, however,
the cause of all this excitement was at a considerable distance from
the ship. It was a poor Swede, named Logholm, who, while engaged in
lashing the larboard anchor stock, lost his hold and fell into the
sea. He could not swim; but, somehow, he managed to keep afloat until
the boat reached him, when he began to sink. The man at the bow ran
his boat hook down, and caught the drowning man by his clothes: his
clothes tearing, the man lost his hold, and the Swede once more sunk.
Again the active bowsman ran the hook down, leaning far over the
side; fortunately, he got hold of his shirt collar: dripping, and
apparently lifeless, they drew him into the boat. He was soon under
the surgeon’s care, whose skill restored him to animation and to
life. It was a narrow escape!

Rising one morning, I heard the men talking about having been called
to quarters during the night. They said a strange vessel having
appeared, the drums beat to quarters, the guns were got ready, those
great lanterns, which are placed on the main deck, called battle
lanterns, were got out, and the officers began to muster the men
at each division; when they discovered the supposed vessel of war
to be nothing more than a large merchant ship. Upon this the hands
were sent below. All this was news to me; I had slept through all
the noise, confusion and bustle of the night, utterly ignorant of
the whole matter. It was fortunate for me that the real character of
the strange ship was discovered before my name was called, otherwise
the morning would have found me at the gratings under punishment.
Never was boy happier than myself, when made acquainted with my
hair-breadth escape from the lash.

We had now reached the island of Madeira, occupied by the Portuguese,
and producing fine oranges, grapes and wine. It is some sixty
miles in length, about forty in breadth; the climate is hot,
but salubrious; its harbor, or rather roadstead, is by no means
commodious or safe--so that our stay was short. Here, the Portuguese
lad who had supplied my place as servant to the surgeon, was sent on
shore, for attempting a crime unfit to be mentioned in these pages,
but quite common among the Spaniards and Portuguese. My old master
made an effort to obtain me again, but did not succeed.

Sailing from Madeira, we next made St. Michael’s. At this pace
we had an increase to our crew, in the person of a fine, plump
boy--born to the wife of one of our men. The captain christened the
new comer, Michael, naming him after the island. This birth was
followed by another. Whether the captain did not like the idea of
such interesting episodes in sea life, or whether any other motive
inspired him, I cannot tell; but when, shortly after, we returned
to Lisbon, he ordered all the women home to England, by a ship
just returning thither. Before this, however, one of our little
Tritons had died, and found a grave under the billows, leaving its
disconsolate mother in a state little short of distraction. A man of
war is no place for a woman.

Short cruises are very popular with man-of-war’s men. On many
accounts they love being in harbor; on others they prefer being at
sea. In harbor they have to work all day, but in return for this they
have the whole night for sleep. At sea, the whole time is divided
into five watches of four hours each, and two shorter ones, called
dog watches, of two hours each, or from four to six and from six to
eight, P. M. The design of these dog watches is to alternate the
time, so that each watch may have a fair proportion of every night
below.

While at our station this time, our old friend, Bob Hammond, met with
some little difficulty, which we will here make matter of record.
He was below, and one of his messmates did something that vexed him
exceedingly. Now Bob was not a man to bear vexations tamely, where he
had the power to resist them; so, lifting his huge fist, he struck at
the offender; missing his real opponent, the blow fell upon another
who stood near him. Bob was too much of a bully to offer any apology;
he merely laughed, and remarked that he had “killed two birds with
one stone.”

Whether the bird, who, in Bob’s figurative language, was killed,
did not like being called a bird, or whether he conceived a strong
dislike to being a mark for Bob to shoot at, is not for me to
say; but he certainly disliked the one or the other, for the next
morning he reported the matter to the officers, which complaint was
considered a most unsailor-like act by the whole crew.

Fighting was a punishable offence, so Bob was called up the next
morning. The captain mentioned what was reported concerning him. He
acknowledged it was all true, and without any signs of contrition
said, “I only killed two birds with one stone.” The angry captain
ordered two dozen lashes to be laid on; it was done without extorting
a sigh or a groan. He was then loosed from the grating, and
questioned; but he merely replied, in a gruff tone, that “the man who
reported him was a blackguard!” For this, he was seized up again and
another dozen lashes inflicted; he bore them with the same dogged and
imperturbable air. Finding it impossible to extort any acknowledgment
from the stubborn tar, the captain ordered him below.

About the same time one of our crew, named Jack Sadler, a fine,
noble-hearted seaman, growing weary of the service, determined to
desert. Dropping into the water, he began swimming towards the shore.
It was not very dark, and he was discovered; the sentry was ordered
to fire at him, which he did, but missed his prey. A boat was next
lowered, which soon overtook and dragged him on board. The officer
commanding the boat said, “Well, Mr. Sadler, you thought you had got
away, did you?” “You are not so sure that you have me now,” replied
Sadler, as he sprung over the side of the boat. Nor would they have
captured him, had not another ship’s boat arrived to their assistance.

The next day, he was seized up and received three dozen lashes,
which, considering his offence, was a very light punishment. I
suppose that his noble bearing, his lion-hearted courage, and his
undaunted manner, produced a favorable feeling in the captain’s mind;
especially as he afterwards became his favorite--a fancy man--as
those men are called who win the favor of their superior officer.

One of Sadler’s failings was that too prevalent evil among seamen,
drunkenness. Soon after the above affair, he got drunk. Being seen
by the captain, he was ordered to be put in irons. Sadler was Bob
Hammond’s messmate; this worthy, finding his comrade in trouble,
made himself drunk, and purposely placed himself in the way of the
officers, that he might be put in irons also, to keep his friend
Sadler company. The plan succeeded. Bob had his wish, and the two
fearless tars were soon ironed together. Nothing daunted, they began
to sing, and through the whole night they kept up such a hallooing,
shouting and singing as might have served for a whole company of idle
roysterers. Being near the ward-room, they prevented the officers
from sleeping nearly all night.

As usual, after being in irons, they were brought up for punishment
the next morning. “Well, Mr. Sadler,” said the captain, “you were
drunk, were you, last night?”

“I was, sir,” replied the offender.

Had he been any other man, he would have been ordered to strip: as it
was, the captain proceeded,--

“Do you feel sorry for it, sir?”

“I do, sir.”

“Will you try to keep sober if I forgive you?” continued Captain
Carden.

“I will try, sir.”

“Then, sir, I forgive you:” and no doubt he was glad to witness that
contrition in his favorite which made it consistent to forgive him.
Having dismissed Sadler, he turned to Hammond: assuming a sterner
look and a harsher voice, he said, in a tone of irony, “Well, Mr.
Hammond, you got drunk last night, did you, sir?”

Bob shrugged up his shoulders, and removed his enormous quid into a
convenient position for speaking, and then replied, “I can’t say but
that I had a horn of malt.”

The captain looked thunder at the stalwart man, as he answered, “A
horn of malt, you rascal! what do you call a horn of malt?”

“When I was in Bengal, Madras, and Batavia,” said he, “I used to get
some stuff called arrack--we used to call it a horn of malt; but this
was some good rum.”

Bob’s manner was so exquisitely ridiculous while delivering this
harangue, that both officers and men broke out into an involuntary
laugh. The captain looked confounded, but recovering himself, he said
to Mr. Hope, the first lieutenant, “Put that rascal in irons; it is
of no use to flog him.”

One of the peculiarities of Captain Carden was an ardent desire to
have a crew of picked, first-rate men. The shiftless, slovenly seaman
was his abhorrence. Had he dared, he would gladly have given all
such their discharge; as it was, he never attempted their recovery,
by offering a reward for their detection, if they ran away; while he
spared no pains to catch an able, active, valuable man like Sadler.
He even gave these drones opportunity to escape, by sending them on
shore at Lisbon, to cut stuff to make brooms for sweeping the deck.
The men sent out on these expeditions were nicknamed “broomers.” Now,
although Bob Hammond was as expert a sailor as any man in the ship,
yet his unconquerable audacity made the captain fear his influence,
and wish to get rid of him; hence, a few days after this drunken
spree, Bob was called on deck to go with the broomers. “You may go,
Mr. Hammond,” said the captain, eyeing him in a very expressive
manner, “with these fellows to cut broom.”

Bob understood the hint perfectly, and replied, “Aye, aye, sir,
and I will cut a long handle to it.” I scarcely need remark that
the broomers returned without Bob. Whether he remained on shore to
cut the long handle, or for some other purpose, he never informed
us: certain it is, however, that the presence of Bob Hammond never
darkened the decks of the _Macedonian_ again.

About this time the prevailing topic of conversation among our
men and officers was the probability of a war with America. The
prevailing feeling through the whole fleet was that of confidence
in our own success, and of contempt for the inferior naval force of
our anticipated enemies. Every man, and especially the officers,
predicted, as his eye glanced proudly on the fine fleet which was
anchored off Lisbon, a speedy and successful issue to the approaching
conflict.

We now received orders to sail to Norfolk, Virginia, with despatches.
The voyage was accomplished without any occurrence of note. We found
ourselves on the American coast, with no very pleasant impressions.
It was late in the fall, and the transition from the mild, soft
climate of Spain and Portugal, to the bleak, sharp atmosphere of the
coast of Virginia, was anything but delightful.

The most disagreeable duty in the ship was that of holy-stoning the
decks on cold, frosty mornings. Our movements were never more elastic
than when at this really severe task. As usual, it gave occasion to a
variety of forecastle yarns about cold stations. Among these was one
which was attested by many witnesses, and there can be no doubt of
its truth:

A British frigate was once stationed in a cold climate. The first
lieutenant was a complete tyrant, delighting in everything that
caused the crew to suffer. Among other things, he took especial care
to make the work of holy-stoning as painful as possible, by forcing
them to continue at it much longer than was necessary. Although he
had no watch on deck, he would contrive to be up in season to annoy
the men with his hated presence. One morning, the weather being
unusually severe, the men sprang to their task with unwonted agility,
and contrived to finish it before the appearance of their persecutor.
To their vexation, however, just as they had completed their work, he
bounced on deck, with a peremptory order to wash the decks all over a
second time.

The men dropped on their knees with the holy-stones, and prayed, as
the tyrant went below, that he might never come on deck again alive.
Whether God heard the cry of the oppressed crew, or whether it was
the action of the ordinary natural laws, the reader must determine
for himself; but when the lieutenant again appeared on deck, he was
brought up “feet foremost,” to be buried. He was taken sick that
morning: his disease baffled the skill of the surgeon, and in a few
days he was a corpse. The opinion that he died a monument of the
divine displeasure against cruel, hard-hearted men of power, and of
disregard for the miseries and tears of the oppressed poor, is at
least worthy of serious consideration.

Soon after we had descried land, an American pilot came on board to
pilot us into Hampton Roads. The sound of our own familiar tongue
from a stranger, was very agreeable to men who had been accustomed to
hear the semi-barbarous lingo of the Portuguese, and a thrill of home
remembrances shot through our hearts, as, stepping on deck, the pilot
exclaimed, “It is very cold!”

While at anchor in Hampton Roads, we fared well. Boats were alongside
every day with plenty of beef and pork, which was declared, by
universal consent, to be infinitely superior to what we obtained from
Portugal. Our men said that the Yankee pork would swell in the pot,
which they very sagely accounted for on the supposition that the pigs
were killed at the full of the moon. But I suppose that Virginia corn
had more to do in this matter than lunar influences; though our men
most doggedly maintained the contrary and more mystical opinion.

The principal draw-back on the enjoyment of our stay at Norfolk, was
the denial of liberty to go on shore. The strictest care was taken
to prevent all communication with the shore, either personally or
by letter. The reason of this prohibition was a fear lest we should
desert. Many of our crew were Americans: some of these were pressed
men; others were much dissatisfied with the severity, not to say
cruelty, of our discipline; so that a multitude of the crew were
ready to give “leg bail,” as they termed it, could they have planted
their feet on American soil. Hence our liberty was restrained.

Our officers never enjoyed better cheer than during our stay at this
port. Besides feasting among themselves on the fine fat beef, geese
and turkeys, which came alongside in abundance, they exchanged visits
with Commodore Decatur and his officers, of the frigate _United
States_, then lying at Norfolk. These visits were seasons of much
wassail and feasting. I remember overhearing Commodore Decatur and
the captain of the _Macedonian_ joking about taking each other’s
ship, in case of a war; and some of the crew said that a bet of a
beaver hat passed between them on the issue of such a conflict. They
probably little thought that this joking over a wine-cup, would
afterwards be cracked in earnest, in a scene of blood and carnage.

It was at this port that the difficulty between the British ship
_Leopard_ and the American frigate _Chesapeake_ took place. Several
American seamen, having escaped from the former, took refuge on board
the latter. The captain of the _Leopard_ demanded their restoration;
the captain of the _Chesapeake_ refused submission to the demand. The
_Leopard_ fired into the frigate, which, being of inferior force,
struck to her opponent. As it was a time of peace, the _Chesapeake_
was not kept as a prize; the claimed men were taken from her, and she
was restored. This was among the circumstances which led to the war
of 1812.

The despatches delivered, and the object of the voyage accomplished,
we once more put to sea; having first laid in a liberal store of our
favorite beef, together with a quantity of Virginia beans, called
Calavances, which were in high favor with our men. To those of our
crew who were Americans, this was rather an unpleasant event. Like
the fabled Tantalus, they had the cup at their mouths, but it receded
before they could taste its contents. They had been at the threshold
of “home, sweet home,” but had not been permitted to step within its
doors. Some of them felt this very keenly, especially a boy, who
belonged to New York, named Jesse Lloyd. In truth, it was a hard lot.

A quick winter passage brought us to Lisbon, where the arrival of the
English mail-bag, and orders to proceed to England with a convoy of
merchantmen, put us all into a tolerably good humor.

The arrival of the mail-bag is a season of peculiar interest on
board a man of war. It calls the finer feelings of human nature into
exercise. It awakens conjugal, fraternal, and filial affection
in almost every breast. The men crowd around, as the letters are
distributed, and he was pronounced a happy fellow whose name was
read off by the distributor; while those who had none, to hide their
disappointment, would jocularly offer to buy those belonging to their
more fortunate messmates.

During the two years of our absence I had received several letters
from my mother, which afforded me much satisfaction. To these I had
faithfully replied. I now experienced the advantage of the primary
education I had received when a boy. Many of my shipmates could
neither read nor write, and were, in consequence either altogether
deprived of the privilege of intercourse with their friends, or were
dependent on the kindness of others, to read and write for them. For
these I acted as a sort of scribe. I also solaced many weary hours
by reading such works as could be obtained from the officers; and
sometimes I perused the Bible and prayer book which my mother so
wisely placed in my chest, on the eve of my departure. The pack of
cards, which so inappropriately accompanied them, I had loaned to
one of the officers, who took the liberty to keep them. This was,
perhaps, more fortunate than otherwise, since their possession might
have led to their use, and their use might have excited a propensity
to gambling, which would have ended in my ruin.

After remaining a very short time at Lisbon, we one morning fired a
gun to give notice to our convoy to get under weigh. Immediately the
harbor was alive with noise and activity. The song of the sailors
weighing anchor, the creaking of pulleys, the flapping of the sails,
the loud, gruff voices of the officers, and the splashing of the
waters, created what was to us, now that we were “homeward bound,”
a sweet harmony of sounds. Amid all this animation, our own stately
frigate spread her bellying sails to a light but favoring breeze;
with colors flying, our band playing lively airs, and the captain
with his speaking trumpet urging the lagging merchant-ships to more
activity, we passed gaily through the large fleet consigned to our
care. In this gallant style we scudded past the straggling ruins of
old Lisbon, which still bore marks of the earthquake that destroyed
it. Very soon the merry fishermen, who abound in the Tagus, were
far at our stern. Next, we glided past the tall granite pinnacles
of towering mount Cintra; the high-lands passed from our vision
like the scenes in a panorama, and in a few hours, instead of the
companionship of the large flocks of gulls, which abound in this
river, we were attended by only here and there one of these restless
wanderers of the deep. We were fairly at sea, and, what was the more
inspiring, we were enjoying the luxury of fond anticipation. Visions
of many an old fire-side, of many a humble hearth-stone, poor,
but precious, flitted across the visions of our crew that night.
Hardships, severe discipline, were for the time forgotten in the
dreams of hope. Would that I could say that everything in every mind
was thus absorbed in pleasure! There were minds that writhed under
what is never forgotten. Like the scar, that time may heal, but not
remove, the flogged man forgets not that he has been degraded; the
whip, when it scarred the flesh, went farther; it wounded the spirit;
it struck the _man_; it begat a sense of degradation he must carry
with him to his grave. We had many such on board our frigate; their
laugh sounded empty, and sometimes their look became suddenly vacant
in the midst of hilarity. IT WAS THE WHIP ENTERING THE SOUL ANEW. But
the most of our crew were, for the time, happy. They were homeward
bound!




                              CHAPTER V


After running a few days before a fair wind, the delightful cry of
“Land ho!” was heard from the mast-head; a cry always pleasant to
the inhabitant of a ship, but most especially so when the distant
hills are those of his native land. Soon after the cry of the man
aloft, the land became dimly visible from the deck, and our eyes
glistened, as the bright, emerald fields of old England, in all the
glory of their summer beauty, lay spread out before us. Ascending the
British Channel, we soon made the spacious harbor of Plymouth, where
we came to an anchor. One of our convoy, however, by some unskilful
management, ran ashore at the mouth of the harbor, where she went to
pieces.

We found Plymouth to be a naval station of considerable importance,
well fortified, possessing extensive barracks for the accommodation
of the military, and having a magnificent dock-yard, abundantly
supplied with the means of building and refitting the wooden walls.

Nothing would have afforded me a higher gratification, than a trip
to the pleasant fields and quiet hearth-sides of dear old Bladen. I
longed to pour out my pent-up griefs into the bosom of my mother,
and to find that sympathy which is sought in vain in the cold,
unfeeling world. This privilege was, however, denied to all. No one
could obtain either leave of absence or money, since a man of war is
never “paid off” until just before she proceeds to sea. But, feeling
heartily tired of the service, I wrote to my mother, requesting her
to endeavor to procure my discharge. This, with the promptitude
of maternal affection, she pledged herself to do at the earliest
possible opportunity. How undying is a mother’s love!

When a man of war is in port, it is usual to grant the crew
occasional liberty to go on shore. These indulgences are almost
invariably abused for purposes of riot, drunkenness and debauchery;
rarely does it happen, but that these shore sprees end in bringing
“poor Jack” into difficulty of some sort; for, once on shore, he is
like an uncaged bird, as gay and quite as thoughtless. He will then
follow out the dictates of passions and appetites, let them lead
him whither they may. Still, there are exceptions; there are a few
who spend their time more rationally. Were the principles of modern
temperance fully triumphant among sailors, they would all do so.

I resolved not to abuse my liberty as I saw others doing; so when,
one fine Sabbath morning, I had obtained leave from our surly first
lieutenant, I chose the company of a brother to a messmate, named
Rowe, who lived at Plymouth. At the request of my messmate, I called
to see him. He received me very kindly, and took me in company with
his children into the fields, where the merry notes of the numerous
birds, the rich perfume of the blooming trees, the tall, green
hedges, and the modest primroses, cowslips and violets, which adorned
the banks on the road-side, filled me with inexpressible delight.
True, this was not the proper manner of spending a Sabbath day,
but it was better than it would have been to follow the example of
my shipmates generally, who were carousing in the tap-rooms of the
public houses.

At sunset I went on board and walked aft to the lieutenant, to report
myself. He appeared surprised to see me on board so early and so
perfectly sober, and jocosely asked me why I did not get drunk and
be like a sailor. Merely smiling, I retired to my berth, thinking it
was very queer for an officer to laugh at a boy for doing right, and
feeling happy within myself because I had escaped temptation.

By and by, three other boys, who had been ashore, returned, in a
state which a sailor would call “three sheets in the wind.” They
blustered, boasted of the high time they had enjoyed, and roundly
laughed at me for being so unlike a man-of-war’s-man; while they felt
as big as any man on board. The next morning, however, they looked
rather chop-fallen, when the captain, who had accidentally seen their
drunken follies on shore, ordered them to be flogged, and forbade
their masters to send them ashore while we remained at Plymouth.
Now, then, it was pretty evident who had the best cruise; the joke
was on the other side; for while their drunken behavior cost them a
terrible whipping and a loss of liberty, my temperance gained me the
_real_ approbation of my officers, and more liberty than ever, since
after that day I had to go on shore to do errands for their masters,
as well as for my own. The young sailor may learn from this fact the
benefit of temperance, and the folly of getting drunk, for the sake
of being called a fine fellow.

My frequent visits to the shore gave me many opportunities to run
away; while my dislike of everything about the _Macedonian_ inspired
me with the disposition to improve them. Against this measure my
judgment wisely remonstrated, and, happily for my well being,
succeeded. Such an attempt would inevitably have been followed by
my recovery, since a handsome bounty was paid for the delivery of
every runaway. There are always a sufficient number to be found
who will engage in pursuit for the sake of money--such men as the
Canadian landlord, described by Rev. Wm. Lighton, in his interesting
narrative,[6] a work with which, no doubt, most of my readers are
acquainted, since it has enjoyed an immense circulation. Endurance,
therefore, was the only rational purpose I could form.

Perhaps the hope of a speedy discharge, through my mother’s efforts,
tended somewhat to this result in my case; besides, my situation
had become somewhat more tolerable from the fact, that by dint of
perseverance in a civil and respectful behavior, I had gained the
good will both of the officers and crew. Yet, with this advantage, it
was a miserable situation.

There are few worse places than a man of war, for the favorable
development of the moral character in a boy. Profanity, in its most
revolting aspect; licentiousness, in its most shameful and beastly
garb; vice, in the worst of its Proteus-like shapes, abound there.
While scarcely a moral restraint is thrown round the victim, the
meshes of temptation are spread about his path in every direction.
Bad as things are at sea, they are worse in port. There, boat-loads
of defiled and defiling women are permitted to come alongside; the
men, looking over the side, select whoever best pleases his lustful
fancy, and by paying her fare, he is allowed to take and keep her on
board as his paramour, until the ship is once more ordered to sea.
Many of these lost, unfortunate creatures are in the springtime of
life, some of them are not without pretensions to beauty. The ports
of Plymouth and Portsmouth are crowded with these fallen beings. How
can a boy be expected to escape pollution, surrounded by such works
of darkness? Yet, some parents send their children to sea because
they are ungovernable ashore! Better send them to the house of
correction.

There is one aspect in which life at sea and life in port materially
differ. At sea, a sense of danger, an idea of insecurity, is ever
present to the mind; in harbor, a sense of security lulls the sailor
into indulgence. He feels perfectly safe. Yet, even in harbor, danger
sometimes visits the fated ship, stealing upon her like the spirit of
evil. This remark was fearfully illustrated in the loss of the _Royal
George_, which sunk at Spithead, near Portsmouth, on the 29th of
August, 1782.

This splendid line of battle ship of one hundred and eight guns, had
arrived at Spithead. Needing some repairs, she was “_heeled down_,”
or inclined on one side, to allow the workmen to work on her sides.
Finding more needed to be done to the copper sheathing than was
expected, the sailors were induced to heel her too much. While in
this state, she was struck by a slight squall; the cannon rolled over
to the depressed side; her ports were open, she filled with water,
and sunk to the bottom!

This dreadful catastrophe occurred about ten o’clock in the morning.
The brave Admiral Kempenfeldt was writing in his cabin; most of the
crew, together with some three hundred women, were between decks:
these nearly all perished. Captain Waghorn, her commander, was saved;
his son, one of her lieutenants, was lost. Those who were on the
upper deck were picked up by the boats of the fleet, but nearly one
thousand souls met with a sudden and untimely end. The poet Cowper
has celebrated this melancholy event in the following beautiful lines:

      Toll for the brave!
        The brave that are no more!
      All sunk beneath the wave,
        Fast by their native shore.

      Eight hundred of the brave,
        Whose courage well was tried,
      Had made the vessel heel,
        And laid her on her side.

      A land breeze shook the shrouds,
        And she was overset;
      Down went the _Royal George_,
        With all her crew complete.

      Toll for the brave--
        Brave Kempenfeldt is gone,
      His last sea fight is fought--
        His work of glory done.

      It was not in the battle;
        No tempest gave the shock;
      She sprang no fatal leak;
        She ran upon no rock.

      His sword was in its sheath;
        His fingers held the pen,
      When Kempenfeldt went down,
        With twice four hundred men.

      Weigh the vessel up,
        Once dreaded by our foes!
      And mingle with our cup
        The tear that England owes.

      Her timbers yet are sound,
        And she may float again,
      Full charged with England’s thunder,
        And plough the distant main.

      But Kempenfeldt is gone,
        His victories are o’er;
      And he, and his eight hundred,
        Shall plough the wave no more.

To return to my narrative: Our ship, having been at sea two years,
needed overhauling. She was therefore taken into one of the splendid
dry docks in the Plymouth dock-yard, while the crew were placed, for
the time being, on board an old hulk. A week or two sufficed for
this task, when we returned to our old quarters. She looked like a
new ship, having been gaily painted within and without. We, too,
soon got newly rigged; for orders had reached us from the Admiralty
office to prepare for sea, and we were paid off. Most of the men laid
out part of their money in getting new clothing; some of it went to
buy pictures, looking-glasses, crockery ware, &c., to ornament our
berths, so that they bore some resemblance to a cabin. The women were
ordered ashore, and we were once more ready for sea.

The practice of paying seamen at long intervals, is the source of
many evils. Among these, is the opportunity given to pursers to
practise extortion on the men--an opportunity they are not slow in
improving. The spendthrift habits of most sailors leave them with a
barely sufficient quantity of clothing, for present purposes, when
they ship. If the cruise is long, they are, consequently, obliged to
draw from the purser. This gentleman is ever ready to supply them,
but at ruinous prices. Poor articles with high prices are to be
found in his hands; these poor Jack must take of necessity, because
he cannot get his wages until he is paid off. Hence, what with poor
articles, high charges and _false_ charges, the purser almost always
has a claim which makes Jack’s actual receipts for two or three
years’ service, wofully small. Were he paid at stated periods, he
could make his own purchases as he needed them. The sailor is aware
of this evil, but he only shows his apprehension of it in his usually
good-humored manner. If he sees a poor, ill-cut garment, he will
laugh, and say it “looks like a purser’s shirt on a handspike.” These
are small matters, but they go to make up the sum total of a seaman’s
life, and should therefore be remedied as far as possible.

Our preparations all completed, the hoarse voice of the boatswain
rang through the ship, crying, “All hands up anchor, ahoy!” In a
trice, the capstan bars were shipped, the fifer was at his station
playing a lively tune, the boys were on the main deck holding on to
the “nippers,” ready to pass them to the men, who put them round the
“messenger” and cable; then, amid the cries of “Walk round! heave
away, my lads!” accompanied by the shrill music of the fife, the
anchor rose from its bed, and was soon dangling under our bows. The
sails were then shaken out, the ship brought before the wind, and we
were once more on our way to sea. We were directed to cruise off the
coast of France this time; where, as we were then at war with the
French, we were likely to find active service.

We first made the French port of Rochelle; from thence, we sailed
to Brest, which was closely blockaded by a large British fleet,
consisting of one three-decker, with several seventy-fours, besides
frigates and small craft. We joined this fleet, and came to an
anchor in Basque Roads, to assist in the blockade. Our first object
was to bring a large French fleet, greatly superior to us in size
and numbers, to an engagement. With all our manœuvring, we could
not succeed in enticing them from their snug berth in the harbor of
Brest, where they were safely moored, defended by a heavy fort, and
by a chain crossing the harbor, to prevent the ingress of any force
that might be bold enough to attempt to cut them out. Sometimes we
sent a frigate or two as near their fort as they dared to venture, in
order to entice them out; at other times, the whole fleet would get
under weigh and stand out to sea; but without success. The Frenchmen
were either afraid we had a larger armament than was visible to them,
or they had not forgotten the splendid victories of Nelson at the
Nile and Trafalgar. Whatever they thought, they kept their ships
beyond the reach of our guns. Sometimes, however, their frigates
would creep outside the forts, when we gave them chase, but seldom
went beyond the exchange of a few harmless shots. This was what our
men called “boy’s play;” and they were heartily glad when we were
ordered to return to Plymouth.

After just looking into Plymouth harbor, our orders were
countermanded, and we returned to the coast of France. Having
accomplished about one half the distance, the man at the mast-head
cried out, “Sail ho!”

“Where away?” (what direction?) responded the officer of the deck.
The man having replied, the officer again asked, “What does she look
like?”

“She looks small; I cannot tell, sir.”

In a few minutes the officer hailed again, by shouting, “Mast-head,
there! what does she look like?”

“She looks like a small sail-boat, sir.”

This was rather a novel announcement; for what could a small
sail-boat do out on the wide ocean? But a few minutes convinced us
that it was even so; for, from the deck, we could see a small boat,
with only a man and a boy on board. They proved to be two French
prisoners of war, who had escaped from an English prison, and, having
stolen a small boat, were endeavoring to make this perilous voyage
to their native home. Poor fellows! they looked sadly disappointed
at finding themselves once more in British hands. They had already
been in prison for some time; they were now doomed to go with us, in
sight of their own sunny France, and then be torn away again, carried
to England, and imprisoned until the close of the war. No wonder
they looked sorrowful, when, after having hazarded life for home and
liberty, they found both snatched from them in a moment, by their
unlucky rencontre with our frigate. I am sure we should all have been
glad to have missed them. But this is only one of the consequences of
war.

Having joined the blockading fleet again, we led the same sort of
life as before: now at anchor, then giving chase; now standing in
shore, and anon standing out to sea; firing, and being fired at,
without once coming into action.

Determined to accomplish some exploit or other, our captain ordered
an attempt to be made at cutting out some of the French small craft
that lay in shore. We were accustomed to send out our barges almost
every night, in search of whatever prey they might capture. But on
this occasion the preparations were more formidable than usual. The
oars were muffled; the boat’s crew increased, and every man was
armed to the teeth. The cots were got ready on board, in case any
of the adventurers should return wounded. Cots are used to sleep in
by ward-room officers and captains; midshipmen and sailors using
hammocks. But a number of cots are always kept in a vessel of war,
for the benefit of wounded men; they differ from a hammock, in
being square at the bottom, and consequently more easy. The service
on which the barge was sent being extremely dangerous, the cots
were got ready to receive the wounded, should there be any; but
notwithstanding these expressive preparations, the brave fellows
went off in as fine spirits as if they had been going on shore for
a drunken spree. Such is the contempt of danger that prevails among
sailors.

We had no tidings of this adventure until morning, when I was
startled by hearing three cheers from the watch on deck; these were
answered by three more from a party that seemed approaching us. I ran
on deck just as our men came alongside with their bloodless prize--a
lugger, laden with French brandy, wine and Castile soap. They had
made this capture without difficulty; for the crew of the lugger made
their escape in a boat, on the first intimation of danger. As this
was our first prize, we christened her the _Young Macedonian_. She
was sent to the admiral; but what became of her, I never heard.

Before sending her away, however, the officers, having a peculiar
itching for some of the brandy, took the liberty of replenishing
their empty bottles from the hold. This, with true aristocratic
liberality, they kept to themselves, without offering the smallest
portion to the crew. Some of them showed, by their conduct
afterwards, that this brandy possessed considerable strength. We
had no further opportunity to signalize either ourselves or our
frigate by our heroism at Brest; for we were soon after ordered back
to Plymouth, where, for a short time, we lay at our old anchorage
ground.




                              CHAPTER VI


At Plymouth we heard some vague rumors of a declaration of war
against America. More than this, we could not learn, since the utmost
care was taken to prevent our being fully informed. The reason of
this secrecy was, probably, because we had several Americans in our
crew, most of whom were pressed men, as before stated. These men,
had they been certain that war had broken out, would have given
themselves up as prisoners of war, and claimed exemption from that
unjust service, which compelled them to act with the enemies of
their country. This was a privilege which the magnanimity of our
officers ought to have offered them. They had already perpetrated a
grievous wrong upon them in impressing them; it was adding cruelty
to injustice, to compel their service in a war against their own
nation. But the difficulty with naval officers is, that they do
not treat with a sailor as with a _man_. They know what is fitting
between each other as officers; but they treat their crews on
another principle; they are apt to look at them as pieces of living
mechanism, born to serve, to obey their orders, and administer to
their wishes without complaint. This is alike a bad morality and a
bad philosophy. There is often more real manhood in the forecastle
than in the ward-room; and until the common sailor is treated _as a
man_, until every feeling of human nature is conceded to him in naval
discipline--perfect, rational subordination will never be attained in
ships of war, or in merchant vessels. It is needless to tell of the
intellectual degradation of the mass of seamen. “A man’s a man for a’
that;” and it is this very system of discipline, this treating them
as automatons, which keeps them degraded. When will human nature put
more confidence in itself?

Leaving Plymouth, we next anchored, for a brief space, at Torbay, a
small port in the British Channel. We were ordered thence to convoy
a huge East India merchant vessel, much larger than our frigate, and
having five hundred troops on board, bound to the East Indies, with
money to pay the troops stationed there. We set sail in a tremendous
gale of wind. Both ships stopped two days at Madeira to take in wine
and a few other articles. After leaving this island, we kept her
company two days more; and then, according to orders, having wished
her success, we left her to pursue her voyage, while we returned to
finish our cruise.

Though without any positive information, we now felt pretty certain
that our government was at war with America. Among other things, our
captain appeared more anxious than usual; he was on deck almost all
the time; the “look-out” aloft was more rigidly observed; and every
little while the cry of “Mast-head there!” arrested our attention.

It is customary in men of war to keep men at the fore and main
mast-heads, whose duty it is to give notice of every new object that
may appear. They are stationed on the royal yards, if they are up,
but if not, on the top-gallant yards: at night a look-out is kept on
the fore-yard only.

Thus we passed several days; the captain running up and down, and
constantly hailing the man at the mast-head: early in the morning he
began his charge “to keep a good look-out,” and continued to repeat
it until night. Indeed, he seemed almost crazy with some pressing
anxiety. The men felt there was something anticipated, of which they
were ignorant; and had the captain heard all their remarks upon
his conduct, he would not have felt very highly flattered. Still,
everything went on as usual; the day was spent in the ordinary duties
of man-of-war life, and the evening in telling stories of things most
rare and wonderful; for your genuine old tar is an adept in spinning
yarns, and some of them, in respect to variety and length, might
safely aspire to a place beside the great magician of the north,
Sir Walter Scott, or any of those prolific heads that now bring
forth such abundance of fiction to feed a greedy public, who read as
eagerly as our men used to listen. To this yarn-spinning was added
the most humorous singing, sometimes dashed with a streak of the
pathetic, which I assure my readers was most touching; especially one
very plaintive melody, with a chorus beginning with,

      “Now if our ship should be cast away,
      It would be our lot to see old England no more,”

which made rather a melancholy impression on my boyish mind, and
gave rise to a sort of presentiment that the _Macedonian_ would
never return home again; a presentiment which had its fulfilment in
a manner totally unexpected to us all. The presence of a shark for
several days, with its attendant pilot fish, tended to strengthen
this prevalent idea.

The Sabbath came, and it brought with it a stiff breeze. We usually
made a sort of holiday of this sacred day. After breakfast it was
common to muster the entire crew on the spar deck, dressed as the
fancy of the captain might dictate; sometimes in blue jackets and
white trousers, or blue jackets and blue trousers; at other times in
blue jackets, scarlet vests, and blue or white trousers; with our
bright anchor buttons glancing in the sun, and our black, glossy
hats, ornamented with black ribbons, and with the name of our ship
painted on them. After muster, we frequently had church service read
by the captain; the rest of the day was devoted to idleness. But we
were destined to spend the Sabbath, just introduced to the reader, in
a very different manner.

We had scarcely finished breakfast, before the man at the mast-head
shouted, “Sail ho!”

The captain rushed upon deck, exclaiming, “Mast-head there!”

“Sir!”

“Where away is the sail?”

The precise answer to this question I do not recollect, but the
captain proceeded to ask, “What does she look like?”

“A square-rigged vessel, sir,” was the reply of the look-out.

After a few minutes, the captain shouted again, “Mast-head there!”

“Sir!”

“What does she look like?”

“A large ship, sir, standing toward us!”

By this time, most of the crew were on deck, eagerly straining their
eyes to obtain a glimpse of the approaching ship, and murmuring their
opinions to each other on her probable character. Then came the voice
of the captain, shouting, “Keep silence, fore and aft!” Silence being
secured, he hailed the look-out, who, to his question of “What does
she look like?” replied, “A large frigate, bearing down upon us, sir!”

A whisper ran along the crew that the stranger ship was a Yankee
frigate. The thought was confirmed by the command of “All hands clear
the ship for action, ahoy!” The drum and fife beat to quarters;
bulk-heads were knocked away; the guns were released from their
confinement; the whole dread paraphernalia of battle was produced;
and after the lapse of a few minutes of hurry and confusion, every
man and boy was at his post, ready to do his best service for his
country, except the band, who, claiming exemption from the affray,
safely stowed themselves away in the cable tier. We had only one
sick man[7] on the list, and he, at the cry of battle, hurried from
his cot, feeble as he was, to take his post of danger. A few of the
junior midshipmen were stationed below, on the berth deck, with
orders, given in our hearing, to shoot any man who attempted to run
from his quarters.

Our men were all in good spirits; though they did not scruple to
express the wish that the coming foe was a Frenchman rather than a
Yankee. We had been told, by the Americans on board, that frigates in
the American service carried more and heavier metal than ours. This,
together with our consciousness of superiority over the French at
sea, led us to a preference for a French antagonist.

The Americans among our number felt quite disconcerted, at the
necessity which compelled them to fight against their own countrymen.
One of them, named John Card, as brave a seaman as ever trod a plank,
ventured to present himself to the captain, as a prisoner, frankly
declaring his objections to fight. That officer, very ungenerously,
ordered him to his quarters, threatening to shoot him if he made
the request again. Poor fellow! He obeyed the unjust command, and
was killed by a shot from his own countrymen. This fact is more
disgraceful to the captain of the _Macedonian_, than even the loss of
his ship. It was a gross and a palpable violation of the rights of
man.

As the approaching ship showed American colors, all doubt of her
character was at an end. “We must fight her,” was the conviction of
every breast. Every possible arrangement that could insure success,
was accordingly made. The guns were shotted; the matches lighted;
for, although our guns were all furnished with first-rate locks, they
were also provided with matches, attached by lanyards, in case the
lock should miss fire. A lieutenant then passed through the ship,
directing the marines and boarders, who were furnished with pikes,
cutlasses, and pistols, how to proceed if it should be necessary to
board the enemy. He was followed by the captain, who extorted the
men to fidelity and courage, urging upon their consideration the
well-known motto of the brave Nelson, “England expects every man to
do his duty.” In addition to all these preparations on deck, some
men were stationed in the tops with small-arms, whose duty it was
to attend to trimming the sails, and to use their muskets, provided
we came to close action. There were others also below, called sail
trimmers, to assist in working the ship, should it be necessary to
shift her position during the battle.

My station was at the fifth gun on the main deck. It was my duty
to supply my gun with powder, a boy being appointed to each gun in
the ship on the side we engaged, for this purpose. A woollen screen
was placed before the entrance to the magazine, with a hole in it,
through which the cartridges were passed to the boys; we received
them there, and covering them with our jackets, hurried to our
respective guns. These precautions are observed to prevent the powder
taking fire before it reaches the gun.

Thus we all stood, awaiting orders, in motionless suspense. At last
we fired three guns from the larboard side of the main deck; this was
followed by the command, “Cease firing; you are throwing away your
shot!”

Then came the order to “wear ship,” and prepare to attack the enemy
with our starboard guns. Soon after this I heard a firing from some
other quarter, which I at first supposed to be a discharge from our
quarter deck guns; though it proved to be the roar of the enemy’s
cannon.

A strange noise, such as I had never heard before, next arrested
my attention; it sounded like the tearing of sails, just over our
heads. This I soon ascertained to be the wind of the enemy’s shot.
The firing, after a few minutes’ cessation, recommenced. The roaring
of cannon could now be heard from all parts of our trembling ship,
and, mingling as it did with that of our foes, it made a most hideous
noise. By-and-by I heard the shot strike the sides of our ship;
the whole scene grew indescribably confused and horrible; it was
like some awfully tremendous thunder-storm, whose deafening roar is
attended by incessant streaks of lightning, carrying death in every
flash, and strewing the ground with the victims of its wrath: only,
in our case, the scene was rendered more horrible than that, by the
presence of torrents of blood which dyed our decks.

Though the recital may be painful, yet, as it will reveal the horrors
of war, and show at what a fearful price a victory is won or lost,
I will present the reader with things as they met my eye during the
progress of this dreadful fight. I was busily supplying my gun with
powder, when I saw blood suddenly fly from the arm of a man stationed
at our gun. I saw nothing strike him; the effect alone was visible;
in an instant, the third lieutenant tied his handkerchief round the
wounded arm, and sent the groaning wretch below to the surgeon.

The cries of the wounded now rang through all parts of the ship.
These were carried to the cockpit as fast as they fell, while those
more fortunate men, who were killed outright, were immediately thrown
overboard. As I was stationed but a short distance from the main
hatchway, I could catch a glance at all who were carried below. A
glance was all I could indulge in, for the boys belonging to the guns
next to mine were wounded in the early part of the action, and I
had to spring with all my might to keep three or four guns supplied
with cartridges. I saw two of these lads fall nearly together. One
of them was struck in the leg by a large shot; he had to suffer
amputation above the wound. The other had a grape or canister shot
sent through his ankle. A stout Yorkshireman lifted him in his arms,
and hurried him to the cockpit. He had his foot cut off, and was thus
made lame for life. Two of the boys stationed on the quarter deck
were killed. They were both Portuguese. A man, who saw one of them
killed, afterwards told me that his powder caught fire and burnt the
flesh almost off his face. In this pitiable situation, the agonized
boy lifted up both hands, as if imploring relief, when a passing shot
instantly cut him in two.

I was an eye-witness to a sight equally revolting. A man named
Aldrich had one of his hands cut off by a shot, and almost at the
same moment he received another shot, which tore open his bowels in
a terrible manner. As he fell, two or three men caught him in their
arms, and, as he could not live, threw him overboard.

One of the officers in my division also fell in my sight. He was a
noble-hearted fellow, named Nan Kivell.[8] A grape or canister shot
struck him near the heart: exclaiming, “Oh! my God!” he fell, and was
carried below, where he shortly after died.

Mr. Hope, our first lieutenant, was also slightly wounded by a
grummet, or small iron ring, probably torn from a hammock clew by a
shot. He went below, shouting to the men to fight on. Having had his
wound dressed, he came up again, shouting to us at the top of his
voice, and bidding us fight with all our might. There was not a man
in the ship but would have rejoiced had he been in the place of our
master’s mate, the unfortunate Nan Kivell.

The battle went on. Our men kept cheering with all their might.
I cheered with them, though I confess I scarcely knew for what.
Certainly there was nothing very inspiriting in the aspect of things
where I was stationed. So terrible had been the work of destruction
round us, it was termed the slaughter-house. Not only had we had
several boys and men killed or wounded, but several of the guns were
disabled. The one I belonged to had a piece of the muzzle knocked
out; and when the ship rolled, it struck a beam of the upper deck
with such force as to become jammed and fixed in that position. A
twenty-four pound shot had also passed through the screen of the
magazine, immediately over the orifice through which we passed
our powder. The schoolmaster[9] received a death wound. The brave
boatswain, who came from the sick bay to the din of battle, was
fastening a stopper on a back-stay which had been shot away, when his
head was smashed to pieces by a cannon-ball; another man, going to
complete the unfinished task, was also struck down. Another of our
midshipmen also received a severe wound. The unfortunate ward-room
steward, who, the reader will recollect, attempted to cut his throat
on a former occasion, was killed. A fellow named John, who, for some
petty offence, had been sent on board as a punishment, was carried
past me, wounded. I distinctly heard the large blood-drops fall pat,
pat, pat, on the deck; his wounds were mortal. Even a poor goat, kept
by the officers for her milk, did not escape the general carnage; her
hind legs were shot off, and poor Nan was thrown overboard.

Such was the terrible scene, amid which we kept on our shouting
and firing. Our men fought like tigers. Some of them pulled off
their jackets, others their jackets and vests; while some, still
more determined, had taken off their shirts, and, with nothing but
a handkerchief tied round the waistbands of their trousers, fought
like heroes. Jack Sadler, whom the reader will recollect, was one of
these. I also observed a boy, named Cooper, stationed at a gun some
distance from the magazine. He came to and fro on the full run, and
appeared to be as “merry as a cricket.” The third lieutenant cheered
him along, occasionally, by saying, “Well done, my boy, you are worth
your weight in gold.”

I have often been asked what were my feelings during this fight. I
felt pretty much as I suppose every one does at such a time. That
men are without thought when they stand amid the dying and the dead,
is too absurd an idea to be entertained a moment. We all appeared
cheerful, but I know that many a serious thought ran through my
mind: still, what could we do but keep up a semblance, at least, of
animation? To run from our quarters would have been certain death
from the hands of our own officers; to give way to gloom, or to show
fear, would do no good, and might brand us with the name of cowards,
and ensure certain defeat. Our only true philosophy, therefore,
was to make the best of our situation, by fighting bravely and
cheerfully. I thought a great deal, however, of the other world;
every groan, every falling man, told me that the next instant I might
be before the Judge of all the earth. For this, I felt unprepared;
but being without any particular knowledge of religious truth, I
satisfied myself by repeating again and again the Lord’s Prayer,
and promising that if spared I would be more attentive to religious
duties than ever before. This promise I had no doubt, at the time, of
keeping; but I have learned since that it is easier to make promises
amidst the roar of the battle’s thunder, or in the horrors of
shipwreck, than to keep them when danger is absent, and safety smiles
upon our path.

While these thoughts secretly agitated my bosom, the din of battle
continued. Grape and canister shot were pouring through our
port-holes like leaden rain, carrying death in their trail. The
large shot came against the ship’s side like iron hail, shaking her
to the very keel, or passing through her timbers, and scattering
terrific splinters, which did a more appalling work than even their
own death-giving blows. The reader may form an idea of the effect
of grape and canister, when he is told that grape shot is formed by
seven or eight balls confined to an iron and tied in a cloth. These
balls are scattered by the explosion of the powder. Canister shot
is made by filling a powder canister with balls, each as large as
two or three musket balls; these also scatter with direful effect
when discharged. What then with splinters, cannon balls, grape and
canister poured incessantly upon us, the reader may be assured
that the work of death went on in a manner which must have been
satisfactory even to the King of Terrors himself.

Suddenly, the rattling of the iron hail ceased. We were ordered to
cease firing. A profound silence ensued, broken only by the stifled
groans of the brave sufferers below. It was soon ascertained that the
enemy had shot ahead to repair damages, for she was not so disabled
but she could sail without difficulty; while we were so cut up that
we lay utterly helpless. Our head braces were shot away; the fore
and main top-masts were gone; the mizzen mast hung over the stern,
having carried several men over in its fall: we were in the state of
a complete wreck.

A council was now held among the officers on the quarter deck. Our
condition was perilous in the extreme: victory or escape was alike
hopeless. Our ship was disabled; many of our men were killed, and
many more wounded. The enemy would without doubt bear down upon us
in a few moments, and, as she could now choose her own position,
would without doubt rake us fore and aft. Any further resistance was
therefore folly. So, in spite of the hot-brained lieutenant, Mr.
Hope, who advised them not to strike, but to sink alongside, it was
determined to strike our bunting.[10] This was done by the hands of a
brave fellow named Watson, whose saddened brow told how severely it
pained his lion heart to do it. To me it was a pleasing sight, for I
had seen fighting enough for one Sabbath; more than I wished to see
again on a week day. His Britannic Majesty’s frigate _Macedonian_ was
now the prize of the American frigate _United States_.

Before detailing the subsequent occurrences in my history, I will
present the curious reader with a copy of Captain Carden’s letter to
the government, describing this action. It will serve to show how he
excused himself for his defeat, as well as throw some light on those
parts of the contest which were invisible to me at my station. My
mother presented me with this document, on my return to England. She
had received it from Lord Churchill, and had carefully preserved it
for twenty years.

                                 “ADMIRALTY OFFICE, Dec. 29, 1812.

  Copy of a letter from Captain John Surman Carden, late commander of
  His Majesty’s ship the _Macedonian_, to John Wilson Croker, Esq.,
  dated on board the American ship _United States_, at sea, the 28th
  October, 1812:--

  “SIR: It is with the deepest regret, I have to acquaint you, for
  the information of my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that
  His Majesty’s late ship _Macedonian_ was captured on the 25th
  instant, by the United States ship _United States_, Commodore
  Decatur commander. The detail is as follows:

  A short time after daylight, steering N. W. by W., with the wind
  from the southward, in latitude 29° N., and longitude 29° 30′
  W., in the execution of their Lordships’ orders, a sail was seen
  on the lee beam, which I immediately stood for, and made her out
  to be a large frigate, under American colors. At nine o’clock I
  closed with her, and she commenced the action, which we returned;
  but from the enemy keeping two points off the wind, I was not
  enabled to get as close to her as I could have wished. After an
  hour’s action, the enemy backed and came to the wind, and I was
  then enabled to bring her to close battle. In this situation I soon
  found the enemy’s force too superior to expect success, unless
  some very fortunate chance occurred in our favor; and with this
  hope I continued the battle to two hours and ten minutes; when,
  having the mizzen mast shot away by the board, topmasts shot away
  by the caps, main yard shot in pieces, lower masts badly wounded,
  lower rigging all cut to pieces, a small proportion only of the
  fore-sail left to the fore-yard, all the guns on the quarter deck
  and forecastle disabled but two, and filled with wreck, two also on
  the main deck disabled, and several shot between wind and water, a
  very great proportion of the crew killed and wounded, and the enemy
  comparatively in good order, who had now shot ahead, and was about
  to place himself in a raking position, without our being enabled
  to return the fire, being a perfect wreck and unmanageable log; I
  deemed it prudent, though a painful extremity, to surrender His
  Majesty’s ship; nor was this dreadful alternative resorted to till
  every hope of success was removed, even beyond the reach of chance;
  nor till, I trust their Lordships will be aware, every effort had
  been made against the enemy by myself, and my brave officers and
  men, nor should she have been surrendered whilst a man lived on
  board, had she been manageable. I am sorry to say our loss is very
  severe; I find by this day’s muster, thirty-six killed, three of
  whom lingered a short time after the battle; thirty-six severely
  wounded, many of whom cannot recover, and thirty-two slightly
  wounded, who may all do well; total, one hundred and four.

  The truly noble and animating conduct of my officers, and the
  steady bravery of my crew, to the last moment of the battle, must
  ever render them dear to their country.

  My first lieutenant, David Hope, was severely wounded in the head,
  towards the close of the battle, and taken below; but was soon
  again on deck, displaying that greatness of mind and exertion,
  which, though it may be equalled, can never be excelled. The third
  lieutenant, John Bulford, was also wounded, but not obliged to quit
  his quarters; second lieutenant, Samuel Mottley, and he deserves
  my highest acknowledgments. The cool and steady conduct of Mr.
  Walker, the master, was very great during the battle, as also that
  of Lieutenants Wilson and Magill, of the marines.

  On being taken on board the enemy’s ship, I ceased to wonder
  at the result of the battle. The _United States_ is built with
  the scantling of a seventy-four gun-ship, mounting thirty long
  twenty-four pounders (English ship-guns) on her main deck,
  and twenty-two forty-two pounders, carronades, with two long
  twenty-four pounders, on her quarter deck and forecastle, howitzer
  guns in her tops, and a travelling carronade on her upper deck,
  with a complement of four hundred and seventy-eight picked men.

  The enemy has suffered much in masts, rigging, and hull, above and
  below water. Her loss in killed and wounded I am not aware of; but
  I know a lieutenant and six men have been thrown overboard.

                                                   JNO. S. CARDEN.

    To J. W. CROKER, Esq., Admiralty.”

Lord Churchill sent the above letter, with a list of the killed and
wounded annexed, to inform my mother that the name of her son was not
among the number. The act shows how much he could sympathize with a
mother’s feelings.




                             CHAPTER VII


I now went below, to see how matters appeared there. The first
object I met was a man bearing a limb, which had just been detached
from some suffering wretch. Pursuing my way to the ward-room, I
necessarily passed through the steerage, which was strewed with
the wounded: it was a sad spectacle, made more appalling by the
groans and cries which rent the air. Some were groaning, others were
swearing most bitterly, a few were praying, while those last arrived
were begging most piteously to have their wounds dressed next. The
surgeon and his mate were smeared with blood from head to foot: they
looked more like butchers than doctors. Having so many patients, they
had once shifted their quarters from the cockpit to the steerage;
they now removed to the ward-room, and the long table, round which
the officers had sat over many a merry feast, was soon covered with
the bleeding forms of maimed and mutilated seamen.[11]

While looking round the ward-room, I heard a noise above, occasioned
by the arrival of the boats from the conquering frigate. Very soon
a lieutenant, I think his name was Nicholson,[12] came into the
ward-room, and said to the busy surgeon, “How do you do, doctor?”

“I have enough to do,” replied he, shaking his head thoughtfully;
“you have made wretched work for us!” These officers were not
strangers to each other, for the reader will recollect that the
commanders and officers of these two frigates, had exchanged visits
when we were lying at Norfolk, some months before.

I now set to work to render all the aid in my power to the sufferers.
Our carpenter, named Reed, had his leg cut off. I helped to carry him
to the after ward-room; but he soon breathed out his life there, and
then I assisted in throwing his mangled remains overboard. We got out
the cots as fast as possible; for most of them were stretched out on
the gory deck. One poor fellow who lay with a broken thigh, begged me
to give him water. I gave him some. He looked unutterable gratitude,
drank, and died. It was with exceeding difficulty I moved through the
steerage, it was so covered with mangled men, and so slippery with
streams of blood. There was a poor boy there crying as if his heart
would break. He had been servant to the bold boatswain, whose head
was dashed to pieces. Poor boy! he felt that he had lost a friend. I
tried to comfort him by reminding him that he ought to be thankful
for having escaped death himself.

Here, also, I met one of my messmates, who showed the utmost joy at
seeing me alive, for, he said, he had heard that I was killed. He was
looking up his messmates, which he said was always done by sailors.
We found two of our mess wounded. One was the Swede, Logholm, who
fell overboard, as mentioned in a former chapter, and was nearly
lost. We held him while the surgeon cut off his leg above the
knee. The task was most painful to behold, the surgeon using his
knife and saw on human flesh and bones, as freely as the butcher at
the shambles does on the carcass of the beast! Our other messmate
suffered still more than the Swede; he was sadly mutilated about the
legs and thighs with splinters. Such scenes of suffering as I saw in
that ward-room, I hope never to witness again. Could the civilized
world behold them as they were, and as they often are, infinitely
worse than on that occasion, it seems to me they would forever put
down the barbarous practices of war, by universal consent.

Most of our officers and men were taken on board the victor ship. I
was left, with a few others, to take care of the wounded. My master,
the sailing-master, was also among the officers, who continued in
their ship. Most of the men who remained were unfit for any service,
having broken into the spirit-room and made themselves drunk; some of
them broke into the purser’s room and helped themselves to clothing;
while others, by previous agreement, took possession of their dead
messmates’ property. For my own part I was content to help myself to
a little of the officers’ provisions, which did me more good than
could be obtained from rum. What was worse than all, however, was the
folly of the sailors in giving spirit to their wounded messmates,
since it only served to aggravate their distress.

Among the wounded, was a brave fellow named Wells. After the surgeon
had amputated and dressed his arm, he walked about in fine spirits,
as if he had received only a slight injury. Indeed, while under the
operation, he manifested a similar heroism--observing to the surgeon,
“I have lost my arm in the service of my country; but I don’t mind
it, doctor, it’s the fortune of war.” Cheerful and gay as he was, he
soon died. His companions gave him rum; he was attacked by fever and
died. Thus his messmates actually killed him with kindness.

We had all sorts of dispositions and temperaments among our crew.
To me it was a matter of great interest to watch their various
manifestations. Some who had lost their messmates appeared to care
nothing about it, while others were grieving with all the tenderness
of women. Of these, was the survivor of two seamen, who had formerly
been soldiers in the same regiment; he bemoaned the loss of his
comrade with expressions of profoundest grief. There were, also, two
boatswain’s mates, named Adams and Brown, who had been messmates for
several years in the same ship. Brown was killed, or so wounded that
he died soon after the battle. It was really a touching spectacle
to see the rough, hardy features of the brave old sailor streaming
with tears, as he picked out the dead body of his friend from among
the wounded, and gently carried it to the ship’s side, saying to
the inanimate form he bore, “O Bill, we have sailed together in
a number of ships, we have been in many gales and some battles,
but this is the worst day I have seen! We must now part!” Here he
dropped the body into the deep, and then, a fresh torrent of tears
streaming over his weather-beaten face, he added, “I can do no more
for you. Farewell! God be with you!” Here was an instance of genuine
friendship, worth more than the heartless professions of thousands,
who, in the fancied superiority of their elevated position in the
social circle, will deign nothing but a silly sneer at this record of
a sailor’s grief.

The circumstance was rather a singular one, that in both the
contending frigates the second boatswain’s mate bore the name of
William Brown, and that they both were killed; yet such was the fact.

The great number of the wounded kept our surgeon and his mate busily
employed at their horrid work until late at night; and it was a long
time before they had much leisure. I remember passing round the
ship the day after the battle. Coming to a hammock, I found some
one in it apparently asleep. I spoke; he made no answer. I looked
into the hammock; he was dead. My messmates coming up, we threw the
corpse overboard; that was no time for useless ceremony. The man
had probably crawled to his hammock the day before, and, not being
perceived in the general distress, bled to death! O War! who can
reveal thy miseries!

When the crew of the _United States_ first boarded our frigate, to
take possession of her as their prize, our men, heated with the fury
of the battle, exasperated with the sight of their dead and wounded
shipmates, and rendered furious by the rum they had obtained from
the spirit-room, felt and exhibited some disposition to fight their
captors. But after the confusion had subsided, and part of our men
were snugly stowed away in the American ship, and the remainder found
themselves kindly used in their own, the utmost good feeling began
to prevail. We took hold and cleansed the ship, using hot vinegar to
take out the scent of the blood that had dyed the white of our planks
with crimson. We also took hold and aided in fitting our disabled
frigate for her voyage. This being accomplished, both ships sailed in
company toward the American coast.

I soon felt myself perfectly at home with the American seamen;
so much so, that I chose to mess with them. My shipmates also
participated in similar feelings in both ships. All idea that we
had been trying to shoot out each other’s brains so shortly before,
seemed forgotten. We ate together, drank together, joked, sung,
laughed, told yarns; in short, a perfect union of ideas, feelings,
and purposes, seemed to exist among all hands.

A corresponding state of unanimity existed, I was told, among the
officers. Commodore Decatur showed himself to be a gentleman as well
as a hero in his treatment of the officers of the _Macedonian_. When
Captain Carden offered his sword to the commodore, remarking, as he
did so, “I am an undone man. I am the first British naval officer
that has struck his flag to an American:” the noble commodore either
refused to receive the sword, or immediately returned it, smiling
as he said, “You are mistaken, sir; your _Guerrière_ has been taken
by us, and the flag of a frigate[13] was struck before yours.” This
somewhat revived the spirits of the old captain; but, no doubt,
he still felt his soul stung with shame and mortification at the
loss of his ship. Participating as he did in the haughty spirit of
the British aristocracy, it was natural for him to feel galled and
wounded to the quick, in the position of a conquered man.

We were now making the best of our way to America. Notwithstanding
the patched-up condition of the _Macedonian_,[14] she was far
superior, in a sailing capacity, to her conqueror. The _United
States_ had always been a dull sailer, and had been christened by the
name of the Old Wagon. Whenever a boat came alongside of our frigate,
and the boatswain’s mate was ordered to “pipe away” the boat’s crew,
he used to sound his shrill call on the whistle, and bawl out, “Away,
Wagoners, away,” instead of “away, _United States_ men, away.” This
piece of pleasantry used to be rebuked by the officers, but in a
manner that showed they enjoyed the joke. They usually replied,
“Boatswain’s mate, you rascal, pipe away _United States_ men, not
Wagoners. We have no wagoners on board of a ship.” Still, in spite
of rebuke, the joke went on, until it grew stale by repetition.
One thing was made certain however by the sailing qualities of the
_Macedonian_; which was, that if we had been disposed to escape from
our foe before the action, we could have done so with all imaginable
ease. This, however, would have justly exposed us to disgrace, while
our capture did not. There was every reason why the _United States_
should beat us. She was larger in size, heavier in metal, more
numerous in men, and stronger built than the _Macedonian_. Another
fact in her favor was, that our captain at first mistook her for the
_Essex_, which carried short carronades, hence he engaged her at
long shot at first; for, as we had the weather gage, we could take
what position we pleased. But this manœuvre only wasted our shot,
and gave her the advantage, as she actually carried larger metal
than we did. When we came to close action, the shot from the _United
States_ went through and through our ship, while ours struck her
sides, and fell harmlessly into the water. This is to be accounted
for both by the superiority of the metal and of the ship. Her guns
were heavier and her sides thicker than ours. Some have said that her
sides were stuffed with cork. Of this, however, I am not certain.
Her superiority, both in number of men and guns, may easily be
seen by the following statistics. We carried forty-nine guns; long
eighteen-pounders on the main deck, and thirty-two pound carronades
on the quarter deck and forecastle. Our whole number of hands,
including officers, men and boys, was three hundred. The _United
States_ carried four hundred and fifty men and fifty-four guns: long
twenty-four pounders on the main deck, and forty-two pound carronades
on the quarter deck and forecastle. So that in actual force she was
immensely our superior.

To these should be added the consideration that the men in the two
ships fought under the influence of different motives. Many of our
hands were in the service against their will; some of them were
Americans, wrongfully impressed, and inwardly hoping for defeat:
while nearly every man in our ship sympathized with the great
principle for which the American nation so nobly contended in the
war of 1812. What that was, I suppose all my readers understand.
The British, at war with France, had denied the Americans the right
to trade thither. She had impressed American seamen, and forcibly
compelled their service in her navy; she had violated the American
flag by insolently searching their vessels for her runaway seamen.
Free trade and sailors’ rights, therefore, were the objects contended
for by the Americans. With these objects our _men_ could but
sympathize, whatever our officers might do.

On the other hand, the crew of our opponent had all shipped
_voluntarily_ for the term of two years only; (most of our men were
shipped for life.) They understood what they fought for; they were
better used in the service. What wonder, then, that victory adorned
the brows of the American commander? To have been defeated under such
circumstances would have been a source of lasting infamy to any naval
officer in the world. In the matter of fighting, I think there is
but little difference in either nation. Place them in action under
equal circumstances and motives, and who could predict which would
be victor? Unite them together, they would subject the whole world.
So close are the alliances of blood, however, between England and
America, that it is to be earnestly desired, they may never meet in
mortal strife again. If either will fight, which is to be deprecated
as a crime and a folly, let it choose an enemy less connected by the
sacred ties of consanguinity.

Our voyage was one of considerable excitement. The seas swarmed with
British cruisers, and it was extremely doubtful whether the _United
States_ would elude their grasp, and reach the protection of an
American port with her prize. I hoped most sincerely to avoid them,
as did most of my old shipmates; in this we agreed with our captors,
who wisely desired to dispose of one conquest before they attempted
another. Our former officers, of course, were anxious for the sight
of a British flag. But we saw none, and, after a prosperous voyage
from the scene of conflict, we heard the welcome cry of “Land ho!”
The _United States_ entered the port of New London; but, owing to a
sudden shift of the wind, the _Macedonian_ had to lay off and on for
several hours. Had an English cruiser found us in this situation, we
should have been easily recovered; and, as it was extremely probable
we should fall in with one, I felt quite uneasy, until, after several
hours, we made out to run into the pretty harbor of Newport. We fired
a salute as we came to an anchor, which was promptly returned by the
people on shore.

With a few exceptions, our wounded men were in a fair way to recover
by the time we reached Newport. The last of them, who died of their
wounds on board, was buried just before we got in. His name was
Thomas Whittaker; he had been badly wounded by splinters. While he
lived, he endured excessive torture. At last his sufferings rendered
him crazy, in which sad state he died. He was sewed up in his
hammock, by his messmates, and carried on a grating to the larboard
bow port. There Mr. Archer, a midshipman of the _Macedonian_, read
the beautiful burial service of the church of England. When he came
to that most touching passage, “we commit the body of our brother
to the deep,” the grating was elevated, and, amid the most profound
silence, the body fell heavily into the waters. As it dropped
into the deep, a sigh escaped from many a friendly bosom, and an
air of passing melancholy shrouded many a face with sadness. Old
recollections were busy there, calling up the losses of the battle;
but it was only momentary. The men brushed away their tears, muttered
“It’s no use to fret,” and things once more wore their wonted aspect.

At Newport our wounded were carried on shore. Our former officers
also left us here. When my master, Mr. Walker, took his leave of me,
he appeared deeply affected. Imprinting a kiss on my cheek, the tears
started from his eyes, and he bade me adieu. I have not seen him
since.

While we lay here, a few days, several of our men contrived to run
away. I should have done so too, but for the vigilance of the prize
officers, who were ordered to keep us, that we might be exchanged for
those Americans who had fallen into British hands.

After staying a short time in this port, we got under weigh and ran
into New London. Here we fired a gun as a signal; it was answered
by the _United States_, and both ships were presently sailing in
company to New York. We found the Sound plentifully dotted with
sloops, carrying passengers, for this was before the days of modern
steamboating. After we reached Hurl-gate, vessels here gave us
plenty of employment. Most of them honored us with three cheers, as
they passed. Of course, the prize crew could do no less than cheer
again, so that we passed our time amidst continued cheering. While
here, we were favored with abundant visitors, curious to see the
captive frigate. Finding these visitors extremely inquisitive, and
being tolerably good-natured myself, I found a profitable business in
conducting them about the ship, describing the action, and pointing
out the places where particular individuals fell. For these services,
I gained some money and more good will. The people who had been to
see us, used to tell on shore how they had been on board of us, and
how the English boy had conducted them over the ship, and told them
the particulars of the fight. It soon became quite common for those
who came to inquire “if I was the English boy that was taken in her.”
This civility on my part was not without a motive; it was productive
of profit, and I wanted money to aid me whenever I got clear, which I
was fully determined to do, the first opportunity.

To this step I was encouraged by our pilot, who brought us from New
London, Mr. Tinker. He promised to take me as his apprentice, if I
ran away. Also a gentleman who visited us told me to call at his
house in Pearl street, and he would give me a dinner. Many others
advised me to get away if possible. But I was so closely watched that
my mind was haunted with fear, lest, after all, I should be sent
back to England in the Cartel, which was expected every day for the
release of the prisoners. To fail in the attempt, exposed me to the
danger of being reported to the officer who might come for us, and
thus I was liable to be flogged whenever I arrived in a British port.
Great caution was therefore necessary in making the effort; since it
was better not to try at all, than to fail of success.

Christmas was now drawing near. The day before Christmas day, the
Americans contrived to get well supplied with wine from a barrel
they found below. As they had no funds, I bought my messmates some
apples and a turkey, so that on the morrow they were quite taken up
with feasting. We also had a great many visitors that day; many of
them were ladies, and the officers got a chair out, which Captain
Carden had rigged up, to lift ladies on board. It was made from an
old hogshead, in the following manner. One head was knocked out and
the barrel scooped out in front; a seat was then inserted, with a
flag thrown over the whole; so that when it was lowered into a boat
alongside, the lady had but to step in and throw the flag round her
feet; in a trice, the chair was whipt upon deck by the halyards, when
the lady could step out with perfect ease. This contrivance afforded
a great deal of amusement, and kept the officers busily occupied in
waiting upon their lady visitors. Now then, thought I, is my time for
escape, or not at all. I had already made a friend of the American
boatswain, Mr. Dawson, who promised to carry my clothes to New York,
if I got clear. So, looking over the ship’s side, I saw a small
colored boy in a boat. “Can you tell me,” said I, hailing him, “where
I can get some geese and turkeys on shore for our officers?”

“I guess you can at some of the houses,” responded the lad.

“Well, then,” I continued, “will you set me ashore? I want to get
some for our officers.”

To this he replied, “Yes, if you will go and ask my master, who is on
board your ship.”

This was a damper on my young hopes, since it was not likely that his
master would give permission. I went below, somewhat disconcerted.
There I met a boy named James Day, two years younger than myself. I
told him I was going to run away, and urged him to go with me. He
declined at first, saying, “I have no money to pay my expenses.”

“But I have money,” returned I, “and as long as I have a shilling,
you shall have half of it.”

“Besides,” continued he, “I am afraid we cannot get away without
being caught, and so get a thorough flogging.”

“Never mind that,” said I; “I have contrived that business.
The boat’s waiting to set us ashore. Come along, Jim; don’t be
frightened; ‘Nothing venture, nothing have,’ you know. Come, come,
here’s the boat alongside.” At length he consented; we returned to
the ship’s side, and told the boy his master was willing, provided
he would make haste. We jumped into the boat, and were soon hurrying
towards the shore, full of the hope of freedom.

Never did my heart misgive me as it did when we were on our way to
the shore; the voice of the boy’s master came echoing along the
waves. “Where are you going with that boat?” he shouted. Recovering
myself, I persuaded the boy he was only bidding him to make haste.
So the lad replied, “I am going to get some geese, sir!” and pulled
on. A few minutes more, and, to my unspeakable delight, I stood on
American soil. Giving the boy a half dollar, we pushed on for New
York, some ten miles distant.

For this act of running away, I have never blamed myself; for the
means by which it was effected, I have frequently done so. As the
reader has seen, it was done at the expense of truth. I told several
deliberate lies to the deceived boy in the boat. This is inexcusable,
and the only palliation that can be offered is, my want of religious
instruction. I was not then a Christian. Still, the act of lying was
an offence before God, and no man should purchase his liberty at the
price of a lie. He who saves his life at the cost of offending God,
pays dearly for the purchase. I am thankful I have since learned this
lesson, at the foot of the cross of Jesus Christ.

Not having our “land legs” on, we soon became excessively fatigued.
When within two or three miles of the city, we concluded to stop all
night at a tavern on the road.

The inmates looked somewhat surprised to see two sailor lads
inquiring for lodgings; so I at once told them we were runaways from
the captured frigate. This made them our friends! The evening passed
quite pleasantly; we relating the particulars of the battle, and
singing sea songs, and they listening with the utmost good humor.

It seemed strange to us to find ourselves in a bed, after sleeping
two years and a half in a hammock; nevertheless, we slept soundly,
and to our inexpressible pleasure arose in the morning at our
leisure, without being driven by the swearing boatswain at our heels.
After breakfast, our generous host having refused to receive any
payment for his hospitality, we set out for the city of New York.

Here I very fortunately alighted on one of the crew of the
_Macedonian_, named Fitzgibbons, who informed me that most of our men
had been landed at New London, and confined as prisoners in an old
barn; but that, not being over closely guarded, most of them had run
away. He also introduced me to a sailors’ boarding-house, kept by a
widow named Elms, near the old Fly Market in Front street.

After spending a week in roving about the city, I heard a tremendous
roaring of cannon in the harbor; it proceeded from the two
frigates--which had dropped down from Hurl-gate and hauled up off the
navy yard. What was more to my satisfaction, however, was the news
that the Cartel had arrived and carried off the British crew, or,
rather, the fragment that remained of them. Had I delayed my escape
three days longer, instead of spending the rest of my days in America
and in the American service, I should have been chained to the
obnoxious discipline of the British navy. The reader may be assured
that the narrowness of my escape very greatly enhanced the value I
set upon my freedom.

I now ventured on board the _Macedonian_ again to obtain my clothes.
As I stepped on board, my mind misgave me, as Lieutenant Nicholson
eyed me somewhat sternly; but I was reassured, when, kindly speaking,
he informed me that the Cartel was gone, and I was safe. The sailors,
also, congratulated me on my success in getting clear.

The officers and crew were about to have a public dinner, and to
visit the theatre in commemoration of their achievement. The sailors
invited me to join them. To this I agreed. But overhauling my
clothes, and contriving how I should appear as well as any shipmates,
who were all going to have new suits for the occasion, the bright
anchor buttons, which shone on my best suit, presented an insuperable
objection. For how could I appear among them with the badge of the
British service on my coat? This dilemma was removed, however, by
the skill of my landlady, the widow, who very carefully covered the
buttons with blue cloth.

There was great excitement in New York, when the brave tars of the
victorious _United States_, walked in triumphant procession through
the streets, in the presence of countless citizens. First, came
Captain Carden’s band, which had now shipped with Decatur; they were
followed by the commodore and his officers, and these by the crew.
At the City Hotel, all hands partook of a sumptuous dinner. This was
followed by rather more than a usual amount of drinking, laughing,
and talking; for as liquor was furnished in great abundance, the men
could not resist the temptation to get drunk. As they left the room
to go to the theatre, the poor plates on the sideboard proclaimed
that “Jack was full three sheets in the wind.” Almost every one, as
he passed, gave them a crack, crying out as they fell, “Save the
pieces;” thus illustrating the old proverb, “When rum is in, wit is
out.”

The visit to the theatre passed off very much like the dinner, to
wit, there was an abundance of shouting and cheering all the evening.
After the close of the play, all hands scattered to see their
friends, with orders to be on board next day. It was a week before
they all returned.

I was much struck with the appearance of Decatur that evening, as he
sat in full uniform, his pleasant face flushed with the excitement of
the occasion. He formed a striking contrast to the appearance he made
when he visited our ship on the passage to New York. Then, he wore an
old straw hat and a plain suit of clothes, which made him look more
like a farmer than a naval commander.

Never had men more friends than the crew of the _United States_ at
this period. Every boarding-house was open to them; every merchant
would trust them; every one was willing to lend them money. What was
it that gained them such public favor? “O their victory, of course,”
replies the reader. Stop; I will reveal the secret. They had some
prize money coming to them in a few weeks! That was the key that
unlocked coffers; the warmth that melted the heart; the spirit that
clothed the face with smiles. But for that--THE PRIZE MONEY--poor
Jack’s credit and favor would, as usual, have been below _par_.

Of course, this profusion, this universal popularity, almost turned
the brains of some of those old tars; and at every opportunity they
would steal ashore for a spree. This brought them into trouble; it
brought some of them to the gangway to be flogged. These floggings,
however, were not very severe; they were rather a species of farce,
enacted to preserve alive the forms of discipline. To avoid even
these forms, the men were accustomed, after staying on a spree for
several days, to visit the commodore’s lady, with some piteous tale,
begging her to intercede for them with their captain. This she did
with almost constant success. The lucky tar would then go on board,
telling his messmates that she was the sailor’s friend, and using the
usual saying in such cases, “Good luck to her--she has a soul to be
saved.”

By this time, the late crew of the _Macedonian_, or those of them who
had not gone home with the Cartel, were pretty well scattered over
the country. One of the marines, named Luke Oil, went to Springfield,
Mass., where he was employed as a file-cutter by Colonel Lee, of the
U. S. armory, at the rate of $75 per month. This prosperity, and an
unfortunate marriage, led him into unsteady habits. He enlisted into
the U. S. army; but growing sick of that, Colonel Lee procured his
discharge. He afterwards enlisted again, which is the last I ever
heard of Luke Oil. Two more of our marines, named Shipley and Taylor,
also went to Springfield, and were employed by a Mr. Ames.

Several of the others enlisted to serve in the fort at New London.
One of these, whose name was Hawkins, was very highly esteemed for
his excellence as a soldier, and was soon made sergeant. But being
an inveterate drunkard, he lost his office, and was degraded to the
ranks.

I have a characteristic anecdote to record of Sadler, the messmate of
Bob Hammond. He enlisted in the American army, and was quartered at
Hartford. He was so delighted with everything American, that he had
grown to be an enthusiast in his encomiums on the government, as was
exhibited one day in a somewhat peculiar way. The company to which he
belonged was marched to church, one Sabbath, to hear (I think it was)
priest Strong.[15] The text was, “Fear God and honor the king.” This
was too much for the newly-made American; and he put the congregation
into a broad grin, by exclaiming aloud, “Don’t let us hear about the
King, but about Congress.” The good people of Hartford would have
pardoned this violation of Puritan propriety, if they had seen that
brave fellow flogged, as I had, in the king’s service.

Our fifer, Charles Robinson, also enlisted in the same regiment.
Perhaps some of the inhabitants of Hartford still remember the
soldier who amused them, during his stay, by playing on the bugle in
the morning, from the top of the court-house. Robinson was perfect
master of several instruments, especially the fife and the bugle.

One of our boys, named William Madden, but better known in the
_Macedonian_ by the nick-name of “Billy O’Rook,” from his practice of
singing a song about that hero, enlisted in the army, and afterwards
performed a signal service for his adopted country, at Sacket’s
Harbor. The Americans were in full retreat before the British troops,
whose general,[16] mounted on a superb charger, was at their head,
shouting, “Huzza, my boys, the day is ours!” when young Madden
rendered desperate by the certainty of being shot, if taken by his
countrymen, deliberately aimed his rifle at the general. The shot
struck him, he fell, and the British retreated. This brave lad
lost his life in a subsequent action. I make this statement on the
authority of Captain Badger, of Williamstown, Mass., confirmed by the
testimony of several other persons.

The reader has probably not forgotten the name of “Bloody Dick.” He
shipped on board the _Hornet_, sloop of war, and with that vessel
very narrowly escaped falling into the hands of the English. I met
him afterwards in New York. He told me how he trembled during the
chase, knowing that if captured he should be hung for entering the
American service; the British having given express orders for a
strict look-out after our crew, that they might make examples of them.

Besides the men just mentioned, others of our crew shipped and
wandered in every direction; some in men of war, some in merchant
vessels; some, fearful of the risk of being retaken, settled ashore.
In short, it is impossible to trace them, so variously did they
diverge from each other. I have been particular in mentioning the
history of a few, to gratify the parties, should they be living, and
ever see my book; to confirm the reader in the truthfulness of my
account, and to show some of the changes that followed in consequence
of the victory of the _United States_ over the _Macedonian_. It
would be an interesting task, were it possible, to trace out all the
results of that victory. Having detained the reader thus long in
following the fate of my shipmates, I will resume the record of my
own in the following chapter.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                            CHAPTER VIII


Nearly two weeks had passed since I left the _Macedonian_. I and my
companion were living upon the sums I had saved from the presents I
received for my civilities to her numerous visitors. One day, as I
was sauntering round the wharves, with my protégé, I met a number of
men-of-war’s men. Stepping up to them, I perceived some of the old
_Macedonians_. Of course, I hailed them. They were glad to see me.
They had shipped on board the _John Adams_, guard ship, to which they
were returning, having been enjoying a few days’ liberty. Nothing
would satisfy them, but for us to accompany them, and ship too. The
midshipman who was with them, joined his entreaties to theirs, and we
at last consented.

To avoid being detected by the British, it was usual for our men to
assume new names, and to hail from some American port, on shipping in
an American vessel. My shipmates advised me to do the same. To this I
had some objections, because I knew that changing my name would not
make me a Yankee, while it might bring me into as awkward a position
as it did an Irishman, who was found by an English cruiser on board
an American vessel. After he had declared himself an American, the
officer asked him, “What part of America did you come from?”

“I used to belong to Philamadelph, but now I belong to Philama York,”
replied Paddy, concealing his brogue as much as possible. “Well,”
continued the officer, “can you say pease?”

“Pase, sir,” said Pat in true Irish style. The officer laughed and
replied, “Mr. Pase, you will please to get into the boat.” The poor
Irishman was unsuccessful in playing the Yankee.

Mentioning these fears, the midshipman said, “Call yourself William
Harper, and hail from Philadelphia;” then turning to my companion, he
added, “and call yourself James Wilson.”

“But,” said I, “suppose the officer should ask any questions about
Philadelphia, what should I do?”

“O say you belong to Pine street.”

“But what if he asks me in what part of the city Pine street is
situated, and what streets join it?” I answered, determined not to
take a step in the dark if I could avoid it.

The midshipman assured me that no such questions would be put;
and, partly confiding and partly doubting, I resolved to make the
experiment. Going on board, we were paraded before the officers.
Addressing me, one of them said, “Well, my boy, what is your name?”

Mustering all the confidence I could command, I boldly answered,
“William Harper, sir.”

“What part of America do you belong to, my boy?”

“Philadelphia, sir.”

Here one of the officers smiled and remarked, “Ah, a townsman.” I
trembled at hearing this, inwardly hoping that they would ask me
no more questions. To my increased alarm, however, he continued by
asking, “What street in Philadelphia?”

“Pine street, sir,” said I, with the air of a man who feels himself
drawn toward a crisis he cannot escape.

“What street joins Pine street, my lad?” asked my tormentor, with a
knowing laugh.

This was a poser; for further than this my instructions had not
proceeded. However, I rallied the little confidence which remained,
and said, “I don’t remember, sir.”

The officer who had claimed me as a townsman, mentioned the next
street, and my examiner went on by asking me what street joined the
one mentioned by the officer.

My colors, which had fallen to half-mast before, were now fairly
struck. I had to surrender at discretion; but thinking to get off
with the honors of war, I answered, “Gentlemen, it is so long since I
was in Philadelphia, I have forgotten all about it.”

This point blank shot might have saved me, when, as if Providence had
determined to make my attempt at lying a total failure, one of them
detected a glittering anchor button, which had contrived to get rid
of the covering placed over it by the fingers of the widow. Pointing
it out to the others, he said, “Where did you get that English
button? Did you pick it up in Philadelphia?”

This was a shot which raked me fore and aft. I hauled down my colors
and stood silent. The officers laughed heartily as one of them said,
“Go below, my lad; you will make a pretty good Yankee.”

Through all this procedure the reader will perceive how perfect was
the disregard of truth among all parties, from my humble self to the
officers, who were evidently rather pleased than otherwise at my
attempt to pass for an American. Such an absence of moral rectitude
is deplorable; it exhibits the unfitness of the parties for a mansion
in His kingdom who is a God of truth: it lays the foundation for a
mutual distrust and suspicion among men, and it leaves the offender
to meet a fearful weight of responsibility in the day that shall try
every man’s work. I am thankful that the influences of Christianity
have fallen upon me since that time, in such abundance as to renew
the spirit of my mind, and to fill me with abhorrence towards a
violation of truth.

The next morning I and my companion, who had escaped the ordeal
that had proved too much for me, were summoned to go ashore to the
rendezvous, that we might sign the ship’s articles; or, in sailor
phrase, get shipped. The officer of the watch shouted, “Boatswain’s
mate!”

“Sir,” answered a deep, gruff voice.

“Pipe away the cutter,” said the officer.

“Aye, aye, sir.”

“Pass the word for James Wilson and William Harper.”

“Aye, aye, sir.”

Then followed a loud, shrill whistle, accompanied with the cry of,
“Away, there, cutters, away!” We were also summoned to appear,
and told to take our seats in the cutter, which by this time lay
alongside, manned by her crew of six men, who sat each with his
oar elevated in the air, waiting the word of command. We were soon
seated, the lieutenant passed the words, “Let fall, and give way;”
the oars fell into the water with admirable precision, and away we
flew towards the shore.

On our way to the rendezvous, I told my companion I should not ship
in the _John Adams_, because so many of the _Macedonians_ were
already there, and it was impossible for us to pass for Americans.
After some debate, we agreed together not to sign the articles. On
entering the house where the stars and stripes were flying over the
door, in token of its being the naval rendezvous, being anxious to
have my friend Wilson pass the ordeal first, I affected to stumble,
and then continued apparently engaged in fixing my shoe-string.
“Well, my boy, what is your name? Just sign it here, will you?” said
the officer.

I took no notice, but remained very busy with my shoes. My shipmate
replied in a low, bashful voice, “I don’t like to ship, sir.”

“Very well, then go below,” said the officer. At this juncture,
feeling encouraged by his remark, I looked up; when, to my
discomfiture, the officer, fixing his eyes on my retreating
companion, observed, “That fellow will certainly be hung;” meaning
that he would get caught by the English. Then, addressing me, he
said, “Now, my lad, just sign your name.”

“Sir,” said I, “I had better not ship alone. The other boy is only
frightened; let me talk to him a little, and I can persuade him to
ship with me.”

The shipping officer was too old a bird to be snared with such chaff
as this. So, speaking rather sharply, he said, “Let him go, sir, and
ship yourself; then he’ll come back and join you; and”--he smiled as
he spoke--“I will let you come ashore to persuade him, in a day or
two.”

Still I pretended not to be convinced, and, after considerable
debate, he let me off. Once more clear, I joined my young shipmate,
and we proceeded together to our boarding-house, congratulating
ourselves on our fortunate escape, as it appeared to us.

Two weeks of idleness had nearly exhausted the little stock of
funds I had picked up on board my old ship, and it was becoming
necessary for me to find some means or other of supporting myself;
for although the prim widow, with whom I boarded, was quite obliging
while her bills were paid, it was altogether probable that she would
become a little crusty if they should be neglected. At this crisis I
fortunately met with an Englishman, who had visited our frigate at
Hurl-gate. His name was Smith; he was a deserter from the British
army; but was now settled in New York, as a boot-maker, in the
employment of the firm of Benton & Co., Broadway. He offered to take
me and initiate me into the art, science and secrets of boot-making.
Seeing no better opportunity before me, I accepted his kind offer,
and at once entered on my novitiate.

Behold me then, kind reader, transformed from the character of a
runaway British sailor, into that of a quiet scholar, at the feet
of St. Crispin, where in the matter of awls, wax-ends, lapstones and
pegs, I soon became quite proficient.

It is altogether probable that the rest of my life would have glided
away in this still and quiet manner, but for a report that reached
me, one Sabbath, as I was wasting its precious hours in wandering
about among the shipping. This was, that there was a tall, stout
seaman on board the _United States_, named George Turner. From
the name and description, I had no doubt that this was my cousin,
who (the reader has not forgotten I presume) presented himself so
unceremoniously to my aunt at Wanstead.

This intelligence determined me to pay that frigate a visit. Going
on board, I found her crew living in a complete Elysium of sensual
enjoyment. They had recently received their prize money. Salt beef
and pork were now rejected with disdain: Jack’s messkids smoked with
more savory viands, such as soft tack (bread) and butter, fried eggs,
sausages, &c.; the whole well soaked with copious streams of rum and
brandy.

Those of the crew who had been in the _Macedonian_, hailed me with a
hearty welcome; those for whom I had bought the turkey and apples at
Christmas repaid me fourfold, so that when I went ashore that night
my purse was as heavy as on the afternoon when I quitted my ship.
My cousin did not recognise me at first; but by referring him to
his visit to my old abode, he at last felt satisfied that I was his
cousin. He then charged me not to mention our relationship, because
he wished to pass for an American. Having given me this charge, he
surveyed me from head to foot, and then said, “What are you doing in
New York?”

“I am learning to make boots and shoes.”

“I am sorry you are bound to a shoemaker,” said he; “I don’t like
that business.”

“I am not _bound_ to Mr. Smith, but can leave him when I please.”

“Well, then,” he remarked thoughtfully, “I don’t want you to go to
sea again. Go to Salem, in the state of Massachusetts. I have a wife
and children there, and shall be at home in a few weeks.”

This was a kind offer, and I at once agreed to take his advice. I
had already grown somewhat weary with the confinement of my new
mode of life, though, on the whole, considering my education, and
the character of the influence exerted upon me in the _Macedonian_,
I was a steady lad. Mr. Smith had left me pretty much to my own
inclinations during the two months of my residence with him; yet my
utmost misconduct had been the drinking of a little spirit, and the
violation of the Sabbath by roaming about the docks and wharves. My
Sabbath evenings I had usually spent in a more profitable manner, it
being my habit to spend them at the Methodist chapel in Duane street.

On returning to the house of my kind employer, I lost no time in
communicating to him my change of purpose. He objected, and justly
too, to be left just as the pains he had taken to instruct me were
about to be requited by my usefulness. However, as I offered him five
dollars, he consented to my departure.

At that time there were no steamboats ploughing the waters of the
Sound, so I engaged a steerage passage to Providence, for five
dollars, on board a packet sloop, and, with a light heart and elastic
step, carried my clothes-bag on board. Here, however, I met with a
trifling loss. While ashore waiting for a fair wind, a negro, who had
engaged a passage in the sloop, robbed my bag of several articles
of wearing apparel, and took French leave. In consideration of this
mishap, the captain exacted only three dollars passage-money. From
Providence a stage, chartered exclusively by a party of sailors,
conveyed me to Boston; from whence I soon reached the house of my
cousin in Salem.

Mrs. Turner received me with great kindness; indeed, she pretended
not to be surprised at my visit, assigning as a reason the very
satisfactory fact that she had seen me with my bag on my shoulder
in the _grounds of a teacup_! She was a believer in fortune-telling
and dreams, having, for aught I know, received her convictions as
an heirloom from her witch-burning[17] ancestors. At any rate she
was strongly confirmed in her favorite theory by my timely arrival;
verifying, as it did, to the very particular of the bag on the
shoulder, the truth-telling tea-grounds.

She gave me another proof, after I had been there a few weeks, of
the truthfulness and verity of dreams, by calling me up one morning,
with an injunction to make haste to the post-office, for she had
dreamed of catching fish. Sure enough, if she caught no fish in her
dreams, she caught a very fine one in the letter I brought to her,
for it contained a one hundred dollar bill from her husband, with
information that his ship was blockaded in the port of New London by
Commodore Hardy.

Accident or curiosity, I forget which, led me to attend the religious
services of the Baptists in Salem. They were enjoying a season of
religious refreshing: several were baptized. The hymn beginning with
the line--

      “Oh, how happy are they who their Saviour obey,”

was sung as the converts came out of the water, and made a strong
impression on my mind. Had some devoted Christian made himself
acquainted with my feelings, and given me suitable advice, there is
no doubt but that I should have been led to embrace the Lord Jesus
Christ. How many divine impressions are destroyed, through lack of
faithfulness in Christians!

Perhaps the great reason why these serious impressions were so
transient, was because the company I kept was so unfavorable to their
growth. Most of my time was spent about the shipping: among these
were many privateers, the profanity of whose crews was such that it
had passed into a proverb. It was usual to say to a gross swearer,
“You swear like a privateer’s-man.” Religion could not flourish in an
atmosphere tainted by their vices.

Among my favorite pursuits was that of fishing. Sometimes I went
with mixed parties of males and females; at others, with a few
sailor companions. One of these excursions came very near costing
rather more than it was worth. We had been out all night; towards
morning we thought we would get a little sleep, and for this purpose
laid ourselves down under the top-gallant forecastle. Luckily for
us, we had an old sailor, named Lewis Deal, on board. He had been
quartermaster on board the _United States_. Knowing that the coast
was strictly guarded by British cruisers, he kept awake. Just at dawn
the _bang_ of a single gun led him to call us, saying, “There, I told
you to look out for Johnny Bull.”

Looking about us, we saw an English gun brig in chase after a
Boston sloop. This was a sight that inspired us with a very sudden
and wonderful agility, since we had a decided repugnance to a free
passage in the aforesaid brig to Halifax; especially as in my case
it might have the rather unpleasant termination of an airing at the
yard-arm; which, for very strong reasons I chose to avoid if possible.

By dint of strong arms and quick movements, we succeeded in
hauling in our anchor and getting under weigh, without attracting
the Englishman’s attention. Expecting a shot at our heels every
moment, we sat breathlessly measuring our distance from the brig.
Fortunately, we escaped notice, and reached Salem in safety.

Shortly after this adventure, the good citizens of Salem were
thrown into a high state of excitement by the noise of a heavy
cannonading. A general rush took place from all quarters towards the
Neck. I followed with the rest. We found it to be occasioned by the
engagement between the _Chesapeake_ and _Shannon_, in compliance
with a challenge, sent by the latter, which was accepted by Captain
Lawrence, of the former. The result is well known. After a short
action, the _Chesapeake_ struck to the _Shannon_, and was carried
away by the victors, in triumph, to Halifax. One reason for the
defeat of the American frigate, may perhaps be found in the fact that
her crew were newly shipped; some of them were volunteer landsmen,
while none of them had what sailors call their sea-legs on. No ship
is fit for action until she has been at sea at least a month. In this
action the captain, first lieutenant, and several men, were killed.
Mr. George Crowninshield sent a vessel to Halifax for the bodies of
those gallant officers; they were interred in Salem with naval honors.

My cousin, having now reached home, was desirous to have me devote
myself to some business. He proposed that of a sailmaker; but by this
time I had quite a desire to go to sea again.

The _Constitution_, the _Frolic_ sloop of war, and the gun brig
_Siren_, were all shipping hands in Boston. My feelings inclined
me towards old _Ironsides_; but my cousin, having sailed with
Captain Parker,[18] of the _Siren_, recommended that officer so
strongly, that I was induced to join his ship, in company with the
quartermaster and several of the former hands of the _United States_.
My cousin also overruled my design of shipping in a false name; so
that, in defiance of my fears, I suffered myself to be entered as
Samuel Leech, on the books of the U. S. brig _Siren_, of sixteen
guns. The payment of three months’ advance, with the sum I brought
with me from New York, enabled me honorably to discharge my board
bills at my cousin’s, and to purchase a little clothing necessary to
fit me for sea. I was then in the seventeenth year of my life.

Once more in a man of war, my seriousness all vanished like mist
before the sun. Alas, it was poor soil to nourish the seed of
life! barren of everything that related to purity, religion, and
immortality.

My first impressions of the American service were very favorable. The
treatment in the _Siren_ was more lenient and favorable than in the
_Macedonian_. The captain and officers were kind, while there was
a total exemption from that petty tyranny exercised by the upstart
midshipmen in the British service. As a necessary effect, our crew
were as comfortable and as happy as men ever are in a man of war.

While we lay in Boston harbor, Thanksgiving-day arrived. Some of our
Salem men inquired if I was not going home to keep Thanksgiving,
for they all supposed I belonged to Salem. What they meant by
Thanksgiving, was a mystery to me, but, dissembling my ignorance,
I obtained leave, determined to learn what it meant. The result of
my visit was the idea that Thanksgiving was one in which the people
crammed themselves with turkeys, geese, pumpkin-pies, &c.; for,
certainly, that was the chief business of the day, so far as I could
perceive. With too many people, I believe that this is the leading
idea associated with the day even now.

Our brig had before this taken in her guns, consisting of two long
nine-pounders, twelve twenty-four pound carronades, and two forty-two
pounders. Our crew was composed of some one hundred and twenty-five
smart, active men. We were all supplied with stout leather caps,
something like those used by firemen. These were crossed by two
strips of iron, covered with bearskin, and were designed to defend
the head, in boarding an enemy’s ship, from the stroke of the
cutlass. Strips of bearskin were likewise used to fasten them on,
serving the purpose of false whiskers, and causing us to look as
fierce as hungry wolves. We were also frequently exercised in the
various evolutions of a sea-fight; first using our cannon, then
seizing our cutlasses and boarding-pikes, and cutting to the right
and left, as if in the act of boarding an enemy’s ship. Thus we
spent our time from early in the fall until after Christmas, when we
received orders to hold ourselves in readiness for sea.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                             CHAPTER IX


As we lay waiting for our final orders, a report reached us that
a large English brig of war, called the _Nimrod_, lay in a cove
somewhere near Boston bay. Upon this information, our officers
planned a night expedition for the purpose of effecting her capture.
Our intended mode of attack was to run close alongside, pour a
broadside upon her, and then, without further ceremony, board her,
cutlass in hand. So we took in our powder, ground up our cutlasses,
and towards night got under weigh. A change in the wind, however,
defeated our designs, and we put into Salem harbor, with no other
result than the freezing of a man’s fingers, which happened while we
were furling our sails. Thus ended our first warlike expedition in
the _Siren_.

Shortly after this affair, we received orders to start on a cruise
to the coast of Africa, and, in company with the _Grand Turk_,[19]
a privateer, set sail from Salem. Passing the fort, we received the
usual hail from the sentry, of “Brig ahoy! where are you bound to?”

To this salutation the first lieutenant jocosely answered, “There,
and back again, on a man of war’s cruise.” Such a reply would
not have satisfied a British soldier; but we shot past the fort
unmolested. After two days we parted company with the _Grand
Turk_, and by the aid of a fair wind soon found ourselves in the
Gulf Stream; where, instead of fearing frozen fingers, we could go
bare-footed and feel quite comfortable.

We now kept a sharp look-out at the mast-head, but met with nothing
until we reached the Canary Islands, near which we saw a boat-load of
Portuguese, who, coming alongside, talked in their native tongue with
great noise and earnestness, but were no more intelligible to us than
so many blackbirds.

While off the African coast, our captain died. His wasted body was
placed in a coffin, with shot to sink it. After the service had been
read, the plank on which the coffin rested was elevated, and it
slipped into the great deep. The yards were braced round, and we were
under weigh again, when, to our surprise and grief, we saw the coffin
floating on the waves. The reason was, the carpenter had bored holes
in the top and bottom; he should have made them only in the top.

After the funeral, the crew were called aft, and the first
lieutenant, Mr. Nicholson,[20] told us that it should be left to
our decision whether he should assume the command and continue the
cruise, or return home. We gave him three hearty cheers, in token of
our wish to continue the cruise. He was a noble-minded man, very kind
and civil to his crew; and the opposite, in every respect, to the
haughty, lordly captain with whom I first sailed in the _Macedonian_.
Seeing me one day with rather a poor hat on, he called me aft and
presented me with one of his own, but little worn. “Good luck to
him,” said I, in sailor phrase, as I returned to my messmates; “he
has a soul to be saved.” We also lost two of our crew, who fell
victims to the heat of the climate.

One morning the cry of “Sail ho!” directed our attention to a strange
sail, which had hove to, with her courses hauled up. At first, we
took her for a British man-of-war brig. The hands were summoned to
quarters, and the ship got ready for action. A nearer approach,
however, convinced us that the supposed enemy, was no other than our
old friend, the _Grand Turk_. She did not appear to know us; for no
sooner did she see that our craft was a brig of war, than, supposing
us to belong to Johnny Bull, she crowded all her canvas, and made the
best of her way off. Knowing what she was, we permitted her to escape
without further alarm.

The first land we made was Cape Mount. The natives came off to a
considerable distance in their canoes, clothed in nothing but a piece
of cloth fastened round the waist, and extending downward to the
feet. As we approached the shore, we saw several fires burning; this,
we were told, in the broken English spoken by our sable visitors,
was the signal for trade. We bought a quantity of oranges, limes,
cocoanuts, tamarinds, plantains, yams and bananas. We likewise took
in a quantity of cassava, a species of ground root, of which we made
tolerable pudding and bread; also a few hogs and some water.

We lay here several days looking out for any English vessels that
might come thither for purposes of trade.

Meanwhile, we began to experience the inconvenience of a hot climate.
Our men were all covered with blotches or boils, probably occasioned
by so sudden a transition from extreme cold to extreme heat. What
was worse than this, was the want of a plentiful supply of water. In
the absence of this, we were placed on an allowance of two quarts
per diem, to each man. This occasioned us much suffering; for, after
mixing our Indian for puddings, our cassava for bread, and our whisky
for grog, we had but little left to assuage our burning thirst. Some,
in their distress, drank large quantities of sea water, which only
increased their thirst and made them sick; others sought relief in
chewing lead, tea-leaves, or anything which would create moisture.
Never did we feel more delighted than when our boat’s crew announced
the discovery of a pool of fine clear water. We received it with
greater satisfaction than ever prodigal did tidings of the death of
some rich old relative, to whose well-laden purse he was undisputed
heir. We could have joined in the most enthusiastic cold-water song
ever sung by either hermit or Washingtonian.[21]

While cruising along the coast, we one night perceived a large ship
lying at anchor near the shore. We could not decide whether she was
a large merchantman or a man of war; so we approached her with the
utmost caution. Our doubts were soon removed, for she suddenly loosed
all her sails and made chase after us. By the help of their glasses,
our officers ascertained her to be an English frigate. Of course, it
was folly to engage her; so we made all the sail we could carry, beat
to quarters, lighted our matches, and lay down at our guns, expecting
to be prisoners of war before morning. During the night we hung out
false lights, and altered our course; this baffled our pursuer; in
the morning she was no more to be seen.

The next sail we made was not so formidable. She was an English
vessel at anchor in the Senegal river. We approached her and hailed.
Her officer returned an insolent reply, which so exasperated our
captain that he passed the word to fire into her, but recalled it
almost immediately. The countermand was too late; for in a moment,
everything being ready for action, we poured a whole broadside into
our unfortunate foe. The current carried us away from the stranger.
We attempted to beat up again, but our guns had roused the garrison
in a fort which commanded the river; they began to blaze away at us
in so expressive a manner, that we found it prudent to get a little
beyond the reach of their shot, and patiently wait for daylight.

The next morning we saw our enemy hauled close in shore, under
the protection of the fort, and filled with soldiers. At first,
it was resolved to man the boats and cut her out; but this, after
weighing the subject maturely, was pronounced to be too hazardous an
experiment, and, notwithstanding our men begged to make the attempt,
it was wisely abandoned. How many were killed by our hasty broadside,
we never learned, but doubtless several poor fellows were hurried to
a watery and unexpected grave, affording another illustration of the
_beauty_ of war. This affair our men humorously styled “the battle of
Senegal.”

After visiting Cape Three Points, we shaped our course for St.
Thomas. On our way, we lost a prize through a display of Yankee
cunning in her commander. We had hoisted English colors; the officer
in command of the stranger was pretty well versed in the secrets of
false colors, and in return he ran up the American flag. The bait
took: supposing her to be American, we showed the stars and stripes.
This was all the merchantman desired. It told him what we were, and
he made all possible sail for St. Thomas. We followed, crowding every
stitch of canvas our brig could carry; we also got out our sweeps and
swept her along, but in vain. The merchantman was the better sailer,
and succeeded in reaching St. Thomas, which, being a neutral port,
secured her safety. Her name was the _Jane_, of Liverpool. The next
morning, another Liverpool merchantman got into the harbor, unseen
by our look-out until she was under the protection of the laws of
neutrality.

Our next business was to watch the mouth of the harbor, in the hope
of catching them as they left port. But they were too cautious to run
into danger, especially as they were expecting a convoy for their
protection, which might make us glad to trust more to our canvas than
to our cannon.

Shortly after this occurrence, we made another sail standing in
towards St. Thomas. Hoisting English colors, our officers also
donning the British uniform, we soon came near enough to hail her;
for, not doubting that we were a British brig, the merchantman made
no effort to escape us. Our captain hailed her, “Ship ahoy!”

“Halloa!”

“What ship is that?”

“The ship _Barton_.”

“Where do you belong?”

“To Liverpool.”

“What is your cargo?”

“Red-wood, palm oil and ivory.”

“Where are you bound to?”

“To St. Thomas.”

Just at that moment our English flag was hauled down, and, to the
inexpressible annoyance of the officers of the _Barton_, the stars
and stripes supplied its place.

“Haul down your colors!” continued Captain Nicholson.

The old captain, who, up to this moment, had been enjoying a
comfortable nap in his very comfortable cabin, now came upon deck
in his shirt sleeves, rubbing his eyes, and looking so exquisitely
ridiculous, it was scarcely possible to avoid laughing. So surprised
was he at the unexpected termination of his dreams, he could not
command skill enough to strike his colors; which was accordingly done
by the mate. As they had two or three guns aboard, and as some of the
men looked as if they would like to fight, our captain told us, if
they fired to not “leave enough of her to boil a tin pot with.” After
this expressive and _classical_ threat, we lowered our boats and took
possession of this our first prize.

After taking out as much of her cargo as we desired, just at night
we set her on fire. It was an imposing sight, to behold the antics
of the flames, leaping from rope to rope, and from spar to spar,
until she looked like a fiery cloud resting on the dark surface of
the water. Presently, her spars began to fall, her masts went by the
board, her loaded guns went off, the hull was burned to the water’s
edge, and what, a few hours before, was a fine, trim ship, looking
like a winged creature of the deep, lay a shapeless, charred mass,
whose blackened outline, shadowed in the clear, still waves, looked
like the grim spirit of war lurking for its prey.

This wanton destruction of property was in accordance with our
instructions, “to _sink_, _burn_ and _destroy_” whatever we took from
the enemy. Such is the war-spirit! SINK, BURN and DESTROY! how it
sounds! Yet such are the instructions given by Christian (?) nations
to their agents in time of war. What Christian will not pray for the
destruction of such a spirit?

The crew of the _Barton_ we carried into St. Thomas, and placed
them on board the _Jane_, excepting a Portuguese and two colored
men, who shipped among our crew. We also took with us a fine black
spaniel dog, whom the men called by the name of Paddy. This done, we
proceeded to watch for fresh victims, on which to wreak the vengeance
of the war-spirit.

The next sail we met, was an English brig, called the _Adventure_;
which had a whole menagerie of monkeys on board. We captured and
burned her, just as we did the _Barton_. Her crew were also disposed
of in the same manner. One of them, an African prince, who had
acquired a tolerable education in England, and who was remarkably
polite and sensible, shipped in the _Siren_. His name was Samuel
Quaqua.

We now remained at St. Thomas several days, carrying on a petty
trade with the natives. Our men bought all kinds of fruit, gold dust
and birds. For these things, we gave them articles of clothing,
tobacco, knives, &c. For an old vest, I obtained a large basket of
oranges; for a hand of tobacco, five large cocoanuts: a profitable
exchange on my side; since, although I drew my tobacco of the purser,
I fortunately never acquired the habit of using it; a loss I never
regretted. My cocoanuts were far more gratifying and valuable when we
got to sea, parched with thirst, and suffering for water, than all
the tobacco in the ship.

While in this port, I had to throw myself on the protection of
the officers, to avoid the disposition to abuse which existed in
one of the petty officers. Several of these gentlemen, who messed
together, had a large boy to wait on them. He was unacquainted with
naval usages, and somewhat awkward withal. This led them to oppress
him: they frequently knocked him round, and even ventured to flog
him with a rope’s-end. The poor lad used to cry, and fret about it,
leading quite a miserable life. By some means, it happened that I was
ordered to take his place; and I determined to resist their habit of
punishing their servant; so, one day, when the gunner came below for
his share of the whisky, and found it was gone, his messmates having
drank the whole, and asked me for his whisky, I boldly answered “I
know nothing about it.”

At this, he broke out into a furious passion, declaring that if I did
not find his whisky he would have my heart’s blood.

To this _dignified_ and _manly_ threat I made no reply, but proceeded
forthwith to the first lieutenant, and laid the facts before him. The
gunner was sent for, reprimanded, and threatened with degradation, if
ever he either struck or offered to strike me again. Of course, I had
no further trouble with these would-be tyrants.

The only other difficulty I ever had on board the _Siren_, was with a
young midshipman, who was on his first voyage--who was, in sailor’s
language, “a real green-horn.” He ordered me, one day, to wash his
clothes. I refused, saying it was not my duty. Putting on the air
of a pompous man, he told me it was my duty to obey an officer, and
I should do it. I persisted in resisting this sprig of American
aristocracy, and as I heard no more of it, I suppose he learned that
he was in the wrong.

The effect of my conduct on the gunner was seen a short time
afterwards, in the following little incident, which will also show
the reader the nature of the pranks practised in men of war, by the
hands. The gunner was a very selfish man, and somehow, when we were
on short allowance of water, he contrived to keep a keg filled, which
he kept in a small state-room; and a man might choke before he would
part with a drop. One night, when my throat was parched with thirst,
I met the boatswain’s mate, and said, “If I were minded to play the
rogue, I could hook some water.”

The mate, who was as dry as myself, looked mightily gratified at this
piece of news, and asked, “Where?”

“I have a key that will fit the lock of the room where the gunner
keeps his water keg.”

“Well,” said he, “give me the key. I will be the rogue, while you
keep watch for the old gunner.”

After drinking all we desired, we locked the door and returned to our
posts, wondering how the gunner would feel when he found that some
one had been practising the arithmetical rule, called reduction, on
his water keg.

The next day the offended gunner threw out sundry hints to his
messmates about his loss, indirectly charging them with the robbery.
This drew down their wrath upon him, and he was compelled to be
content with swallowing his choler, and getting a new lock for his
state-room. In all his rage he never uttered a word to me: he had not
forgotten my appeal to his superiors.

From St. Thomas we proceeded to Angola, where we staid long enough
to clean, paint and refit our brig, from stem to stern. This was the
last port we intended to touch at on the coast of Africa. Our next
anchorage was to be in Boston harbor--at least so we purposed; but
Providence and the British ordered it otherwise.

To accomplish our object, we had to run the gauntlet through the
host of English cruisers that hovered about, like birds of prey,
along both sides of the Atlantic coast. This enterprise appeared
so impossible to my mind, while we lay at Angola, and the fear of
being retaken and hung operated so strongly on my imagination, that,
more than once, I determined to run away and find a refuge among the
Africans; but my better judgment prevailed at last, and I continued
at my post.

Still, I used every possible precaution to escape detection in case
of our capture. In accordance with the custom of our navy at that
period, I let my hair grow long behind. To change my looks more
effectually, instead of tying mine in a cue as the others did, I let
it hang in ringlets all round my face and neck. This, together with
the effect of time, caused me to appear quite a different lad from
what I was, when a boy, on board the _Macedonian_. I also adopted
that peculiarity of dress practised by American men-of-war’s-men,
which consisted in wearing my shirt open at the neck, with the
corners thrown back. On these corners a device was wrought,
consisting of the stars of the American flag, with the British flag
underneath. By these means I hoped to pass for a genuine Yankee,
without suspicion, in case we should fall into English hands.

Having finished our preparations, we left Angola for Boston. We
reached the island of Ascension in safety, where was a post-office
of a truly patriarchal character. A box is nailed to a post near
the shore. Ships that pass send to the box and deposit or take out
letters, as the case may be. This is probably the cheapest general
post-office establishment in the world.

We had scarcely left this island before the cry of “Sail ho!”
arrested every ear. Supposing her to be a large merchantman, we made
towards her; but a nearer approach made it doubtful whether she was
an Indiaman or a man of war. The captain judged her to be the latter,
and tacked ship immediately. He was unwilling to place himself in the
situation of an American privateer, who, mistaking a seventy-four for
a merchantman, ran his ship close alongside, and boldly summoned
her to haul down her colors. The captain of the other ship coolly
replied, “I am not in the habit of striking my colors.” At the same
moment the ports of his ship were opened, and disclosed her long
ranges of guns, yawning over the decks of the privateer. Perceiving
his mistake, the privateer, with admirable tact and good humor,
said, “Well, if you won’t, I will,” and pulling down his bunting,
surrendered to his more powerful foe. To avoid such a mistake as
this, our captain made all sail to escape the coming stranger, which
was now bearing down upon us under a heavy pressure of canvas,
revealing, as she gained upon our little brig, that she bore the
formidable character of a seventy-four gun ship, under English colors.

Of course, fighting was out of the question. It would be like
the assault of a dog on an elephant, or a dolphin on a whale. We
therefore crowded all possible sail, threw our guns, cables, anchors,
hatches, &c., overboard, to increase her speed. But it soon became
apparent that we could not escape. The wind blew quite fresh, which
gave our opponent the advantage: she gained on us very fast. We
shifted our course, in hopes to baffle her until night, when we felt
pretty sure of getting out of her way. It was of no use, she still
gained, until we saw ourselves almost within gun-shot of our opponent.

In this extremity, the captain ordered the quartermaster, George
Watson, to throw the private signals overboard. This was a hard
task for the bold-hearted fellow. As he pitched them into the sea,
he said, “Good-bye, brother Yankee;” an expression which, in spite
of their mortifying situation, forced a smile from the lips of the
officers.

The sound of a gun now came booming through the air. It was a signal
for us to heave to, or to look out for consequences. What might
have been, we learned afterwards, for a division of the crew of the
seventy-four had orders to sink us if we made the least show of
resistance. Finding it useless to prolong the chase, our commander
reluctantly ordered the flag to be struck. We then hove to, and our
foe came rolling down upon us, looking like a huge avalanche rushing
down the mountain side to crush some poor peasant’s dwelling. Her
officers stood on her quarter deck, glancing unutterable pride, while
her captain shouted, “What brig is that?”

“The United States brig _Siren_,” replied Captain Nicholson.

“This is his Britannic Majesty’s ship _Medway_!”[22] he answered. “I
claim you as my lawful prize.”

Boats were then lowered, the little brig taken from us, and our crew
transferred to the _Medway_, stowed away in the cable tier, and put
in messes of twelve, with an allowance of only eight men’s rations
to a mess; a regulation which caused us considerable suffering from
hunger. The sight of the marines on board the _Medway_ made me
tremble, for my fancy pointed out several of them as having formerly
belonged to the _Macedonian_. I really feared I was destined to
speedily swing at the yard-arm; it was, however, a groundless alarm.

This event happened July 12, 1814. Only eight days before, we
had celebrated the independence of our country, by dancing and
splicing the main-brace. Now we had a fair prospect of a rigorous
imprisonment. Such are the changes which constantly occur under the
rule of the war-spirit.

The day subsequent to our capture, we were marched to the quarter
deck with our clothes-bags, where we underwent a strict search. We
were ordered to remove our outside garments for this purpose. They
expected to find us in possession of large quantities of gold dust.
What little our crew had purchased was taken from them, with a spirit
of rapacity altogether beneath the dignity of a naval commander.

Our short allowance was a source of much discomfort in this our
prison-ship. But, in the true spirit of sailors, we made even this a
subject of coarse jests and pleasant remark. Some would sit and paint
the luxuries of shore life until our mouths watered at the idea of
soft tack, fried eggs, sausages, and those other delicacies which
go to make up a sailor’s idea of a sensual paradise. Others would
discourse about roast beef, boiled lamb, and caper sauce; to which
some old weather-beaten tar would answer, “Give me the lamb and a
knife and fork, and I will cut capers enough.” This would draw out
peals of laughter, to be followed by various yarns of feasts gone
by, and of sprees enjoyed on liberty and paydays. Thus we beguiled
our time; though, with all our laughing, we could not laugh away the
clamors of our hungry stomachs; and when I took my turn of a few
minutes on deck, the gift of a piece of hard, dry biscuit, afforded
me more gustatory delight, than would the taste of the richest
pound-cake, now that I have an abundance of food.

Enduring this evil, we proceeded on our course. When the _Medway_
arrived at Simon’s Town, about twenty-one miles from the Cape of Good
Hope, we met the _Denmark_, seventy-four, on her way to England, with
prisoners from Cape Town. The captain had hitherto intended to land
us at the latter place, but the presence of the _Denmark_ led him to
change his purpose, and land us at Simon’s Town.

The journey from this place to the Cape was one of great suffering to
our crew. We were received on the beach by a file of Irish soldiers.
Under their escort we proceeded seven miles, through heaps of burning
sand, seeing nothing worthy of notice on the way, but a number of men
busily engaged in cutting up dead whales on the sea-shore.

After resting a short time, we recommenced our march, guarded by
a new detachment of soldiers. Unused to walking as we were, we
began to grow excessively fatigued; and, after wading a stream of
considerable depth, we were so overcome, that it seemed impossible to
proceed any farther. We lay down, discouraged and wretched, on the
sand. The guard brought us some bread, and gave half-a-pint of wine
to each man. This revived us somewhat. We were now placed under a
guard of dragoons. They were very kind, and urged us to attempt the
remaining seven miles. To relieve us, they carried our clothes-bags
on their horses; and overtaking some Dutch farmers, going to the Cape
with broom-stuff and brush, the officer of the dragoons made them
carry the most weary among us in their wagons. It is not common for
men to desire the inside of a prison, but I can assure my readers
we did most heartily wish ourselves there, on that tedious journey.
At last, about nine o’clock, P. M., we arrived at Cape Town, having
left one of our number at Wineburg, through exhaustion, who joined us
the next day. Stiff, sore, and weary, we hastily threw ourselves on
the hard boards of our prison, where, without needing to be soothed
or rocked, we slept profoundly until late the next morning. For a
description of our prison, with what happened to us there, the reader
is referred to the succeeding chapter.




                              CHAPTER X


The next morning we took a survey of our new quarters. We found
ourselves placed in a large yard, surrounded by high walls, and
strongly guarded by soldiers. Within this inclosure, there was a
building, or shed, composed of three rooms, neither of which had
any floor. Round the sides stood three benches or stages, one above
the other, to serve for berths. On these we spread our hammocks and
bed-clothes, making them tolerably comfortable places to sleep in. A
few of the men preferred to sling their hammocks, as they did at sea.
Here, also, we used to eat, unless, as was our frequent practice, we
did so in the open air.

Our officers had been sent thirty miles inland, so that we had lost
the natural exactors of discipline among seamen. To remedy this
deficiency, our first step was to adopt a set of regulations in
respect to order, cleanliness, &c., and to appoint certain of our
number to enforce them.

We experienced some unpleasantness, at first, from the insolence of
some of the sergeants commanding the prison guard. Most of these
petty officers were very friendly and kind, but two or three of them
manifested a surly, tyrannical temper, annoying us in many little
things, enough to embitter our enjoyment, while they were on duty.
This petty despotism we soon cured, by returning their abuse in a
rather provoking kind of coin. We used to plague them by causing
a long delay when the hour arrived for them to be relieved. They
were required to muster us every morning, that we might be counted
before the new guard took us in charge. On those occasions some would
purposely absent themselves; others were sent to find the absentees;
these, in their turn, would hide themselves, and require to be sought
by others. This was excessively vexatious to the soldiers, and as
it occurred only when a tyrannical sergeant was on guard, they soon
understood its meaning. The plan was successful, and we thus got rid
of one source of discomfort.

Our next difficulty was with the old Dutchman, named Badiem, who
furnished our prison with provisions. He had already learned the
difficulty of cheating a Yankee; for the Americans who were carried
away in the _Denmark_ had been in this same prison, and had taught
the old man that they were rougher customers than the Frenchmen who
had preceded them. We gave him another lesson.

He undertook to wrong us and benefit himself by furnishing a very
inferior article of bread. After counselling among ourselves, we took
the following plan to bring him to his senses:

We were visited every day by a superior officer, called the officer
of the day. He was a kind old man, who had seen service in the war
of the revolution, and was at the battle of Bunker Hill. He had a
profound respect for the American character, and could not speak of
that great action without tears. One day a friendly sergeant being on
duty, we gave him a piece of the old Dutchman’s bread, complaining
bitterly of its quality. When the old officer came round as usual,
on a fine, dashing charger, and asked his customary question of “All
right?” our friend the sergeant replied, “No, sir!”

“What is the matter?” asked the venerable old gentleman.

“The prisoners complain of their bread, sir,” said the sergeant.

“Let me see it,” answered the general. The sergeant gave him a small
piece. He examined it, wrapped it up carefully in some paper, clapped
the spurs to his horse, and rode off. The next day, we had better
bread than ever before, and an order came for a man from each room
to go with the sentry to the town every morning, to examine our
daily provision; and, if not what it should be, to reject it. This
completely upset the golden visions of the old Dutchman. With much
choler he exclaimed, “I had rather have one tousand Frenchmen, than
one hundred Yankees.”

We could not now complain of our fare. We had an abundance of beef
and mutton, beside a full allowance of bread, &c. The beef, to be
sure, was poor, lean stuff, but the mutton was excellent. The sheep
at the Cape have a peculiarity, which may cause the reader to smile.
They have enormously large, flat tails, weighing from twelve to
twenty pounds. These are regularly sold by the pound for purposes of
cookery. Should any one treat this statement as a forecastle yarn, I
refer him to the descriptions of these sheep, given by travellers and
naturalists.[23]

Besides our prison allowance, we had opportunity to purchase as many
little luxuries and niceties as our slender finances would permit.
These were furnished by a slave, who was the property of the old
Dutchman, and who was so far a favorite as to be indulged with two
wives, and the privilege of selling sundry small articles to the
prisoners. This sable polygamist furnished us with coffee, made from
burnt barley, for a _doublegee_ (an English penny)[24] per pint; the
same sum would purchase a sausage, a piece of fish, or a glass of
rum. On equally reasonable terms, he furnished us with blackberries,
oranges, &c. Our men, who, by the way had eaten fruit in every
quarter of the globe, and were therefore competent judges, pronounced
the latter the best in the world. The berries afforded me a rich
treat at Christmas.

To obtain means for the purchase of these dainties, our men braided
hats, wrought at mechanical employments, or at such pursuits as their
respective tastes and capacities suggested. These occupations served
to beguile our confinement of much of its tediousness.

Still, we had many vacant, listless hours. To fill them, we resorted
to the demoralizing practice of gambling. A game with balls, called
shake-bag, loo, venture, all-fours, &c. occupied our evening hours,
and sometimes the whole night. It was not uncommon for the game to
be protracted beyond the midnight hour of Saturday, into the sacred
moments of the holy Sabbath. On one of these guilty mornings, some
of us, on retiring to a shed, found the dead body of a black slave,
hanging by the rope, with which, in a moment of unpardonable despair,
he had committed the horrid crime of suicide. The hour, the scene,
the place, our recent guilty profanation of God’s holy day, conspired
to fill many of us with profound dread. In my own mind it led to a
few transient purposes of amendment. Alas! when the bright sun arose,
these purposes had vanished. The influence of vice triumphed. I grew
more and more hardened in wickedness.

Cape Town contained a large slave population. These poor wretches
had been extremely degraded under the rule of the Dutch. It was said
that their condition had been essentially improved since the conquest
of the place by the English. Still, as the suicide just mentioned
demonstrated, slavery was a bitter draught. The British have done
wisely since then in granting freedom to the slaves in all their
colonies. May the whole world imitate the noble example!

We were subjected to frequent and violent gales of wind while here.
The approach of these storms was always faithfully proclaimed by the
mountain that towered up behind us; a large white cloud, resting
on its summit, like a tablecloth, was a certain indication of the
elemental warfare. Whenever this phenomenon appeared, our men
used to remark, “Look out for a blow, the cloth is beginning to
spread.” Very soon the vessels in the bay could be seen striking
their top-gallant masts and yards, and sometimes even housing their
top-masts. In a few minutes the ocean would give signs of the coming
commotion; the waves became crested with clouds of foam, and the
spirit of the storm was seen careering in triumph over the liquid
mountains of the angry deep.

Besides Table mountain, there was another near it, called the Lion’s
Rump, from its similarity to that noble animal in a sitting posture.
On the summit of this mountain was a telegraph, which informed us, in
common with the people of the Cape, of the approach of shipping to
the harbor.

At the town, the British had a hospital for the accommodation of
their army and navy. The advantages of this institution were humanely
and properly offered to us, whenever we were sick. Happening to be
quite unwell one day, my shipmates advised me to go thither. Now,
on board the _Siren_, when in a similar state, the surgeon had
administered an ounce of Glauber salts. The dose caused such nausea,
that from that time I held salts in profound abhorrence. When the
hospital was suggested to me, I associated it with the idea of salts,
and, shuddering, remarked that “I would go if I thought they would
not give me salts.” My shipmates all said they thought I should not
have salts prescribed: so, under the guard of a sentry, I sallied
forth to the hospital. “Well, my boy,” said the doctor, “what’s the
matter with you?”

With many wry faces, I told him my symptoms; when, to my
inconceivable mortification and disgust, he spoke to a sort of
lob-lolly boy, who waited upon him, and said, “Doctor Jack! bring
this boy six ounces of salts.”

This was intolerable. One ounce had sickened me for months at the
bare mention of salts, and now I was to swallow six! It seemed
impossible. The remedy was worse than the disease. I wished myself
back at my quarters. This was, however, in vain, unless I took
a dangerous leap from the window. I must submit. The salts were
brought, but they were not so bad, either in quality or quantity, as
my dose in the _Siren_. The reason I found to consist in the fact,
that they were Epsom instead of Glauber, and that the six ounces
included the weight of the water in which they were dissolved. So
well was I pleased with my visit to the hospital, and especially with
the privilege afforded me of walking about the streets of Cape Town,
that I afterwards feigned illness to gain another admission. I was
willing to take the salts for the sake of the liberty of jaunting
about the streets. Of the sin of lying I thought nothing. I was a
sailor, caring little for aught but present gratification. The beauty
of truth I had never seen; the hatefulness of a lie I had never
learned. Most gratefully do I acknowledge that Divine goodness, which
has since effectually taught me both the one and the other.

At Cape Town there was a small prison, called the “Trunk.” To this
place those of our number, who were disorderly, were sent, to be
closely confined, on no other diet than bread and water, for as many
days as the commandant might designate. We always quietly permitted
any offender among us to be sent thither without resistance: but
when, on one occasion, an attempt was made to confine two of our
shipmates unjustly, we gave them a demonstration, which saved us
afterwards from any similar attempt.

Two of our men had hung out some clothes, they had just washed, in
our yard, near their own shed. Now, it happened that the doctor to
the military stationed at the Cape, had an entrance to his office
through our yard. The clothes were undesignedly hung across his path,
compelling him either to stoop a little in passing, or to ask their
removal. He was too proud to adopt either of these peaceful methods,
but, with manifest spitefulness, he took out his knife and cut the
line, so that the clothes fell into the dirt. The owners, seeing
their wet clothing in this condition, broke out into passionate
inquiries after the offender. “It was the English doctor,” replied
one of our shipmates, who had witnessed the whole affair. This
brought forth a volley of sailors’ oaths from the offended parties.
The enraged doctor overheard their wrathful ebullitions, and, without
further ceremony, ordered the two men to be carried to the “Trunk.”

Here, then, was a manifest case of injustice. We resolved not to
submit to it, let the consequences be what they might. When the
sergeant came in for the doctor’s victims, we all turned out in
a body, declaring we would all go to the “Trunk” together. The
sergeant, seeing us in this state of rebellion, called out the whole
guard, and ordered them to load and fire upon us. We were not however
so easily scared. We shouted, “Fire away! You will have but one fire,
and then it will be our turn.” At the same time we picked up all the
broken glass, sticks, stones, &c., which were within our reach, and
stood waiting for their firing as the signal for a general _mêlée_.
The sergeant, seeing our resolution, and wisely considering that our
superiority in numbers, might secure us a victory over the handful
composing his guard, ordered the soldiers to retire. We never heard
any more of the little doctor’s indignation: it probably evaporated,
like the moisture from the clothes his petty indignation had thrown
to the ground. How insignificant such acts appear, in men professing
to be gentlemen!

Shortly after this event, we were thrown into confusion and temporary
excitement, by the approach of a large party to our prison, at
midnight, attended by a band of music. We turned out and rushed
to the gate of our yard. The guard turned out likewise, trembling
under the impression that our countrymen had captured the town and
were coming to give us our liberty. Their fears and our wonder were
quieted, however, by a speedy discovery of the true character of this
midnight party. It was a Dutch wedding, coming to the house of the
old Dutchman, our caterer; the entrance to which being in our yard,
the party had to pass directly through our territories; which they
did, their band playing the tune of “A free and accepted Mason.”

Notwithstanding we were in tolerably comfortable circumstances, our
confinement soon became exceedingly irksome. We pined for freedom; we
longed to get once more where the “old gridiron” floated in fearless
triumph. A report of the burning of Washington by the British added
not a little to our desire. We began to talk of home. This led to
other suggestions; these to the formation of plans for our escape. We
at length concerted a measure, which was, to break from the prison
in the night, disarm and confine the guard, help ourselves to boats,
and cut out some large ship, in which we might make our escape to
America. The success of this plot, however, was never tested; for,
reaching the ears of the commander, the guards were strengthened;
the light dragoons ordered out to patrol the harbor; and such other
preventive measures adopted, as cut off all hope of forcible escape.
Our only remedy for this disappointment, was submission, and boasting
of what we would have done, had we got into the strife for liberty.

As the period of our imprisonment drew towards a close, we were
informed that the Rev. George Thom, a missionary, was desirous to
come and preach to us. Some of our men objected, because, they
said, he would preach about his king, and they had no desire to
hear anything about kings. Others said, “Let him come; we will hear
him with attention, and if we don’t like him we can afterwards stay
away. At any rate, don’t let us abuse him; but rather show him that
Americans know what is good behavior.”

This reply shows the true spirit of the mass of seamen in respect
to religion; for though they care little about personal piety, they
will not, usually, unless intoxicated, insult a minister. This was
once shown in the experience of the eccentric Rowland Hill; when a
mob threatened the old gentleman with mischief, some sailors present
rallied round him, threatening vengeance on any who dared to insult
the preacher.

Accordingly, we sent our respects to Mr. Thom, inviting him to
favor us with a visit. We then cleaned and fitted up one room with
benches. The following Sabbath he came. His preaching was earnest,
simple and interesting. Instead of discoursing about kings, as some
had predicted, the only king about whom he preached, was the King of
heaven. We invited him to come again. He accepted the invitation,
and our meetings soon began to be profitable and interesting. We had
singing, for several of our men were tolerable singers, and they
were aided by the presence of some pious soldiers from the garrison,
and occasionally by Mrs. Thom, the amiable lady of our excellent
preacher. Our officers, too, frequently came from their residence,
and were pleased to see the good order and happiness apparent on
these occasions. I assure my readers, that the most delightful
moments of our imprisonment were those we spent in singing some sweet
hymn, in the good old-fashioned tunes of _Bridgewater_, _Russia_,
_Wells_, &c.

Among the texts used by Mr. Thom, I remember the following: “Turn ye
to the strong-hold, ye prisoners of hope;” Zech. ix. 12. “Behold,
I stand at the door and knock,” &c.; Rev. iii. 20. “And yet there
is room;” Luke xiv. 22. It was really pleasing to hear the various
remarks made by our men, after listening to faithful discourses from
these and similar texts. One would remark, “He hit me a clew.” To
this another would reply, “He shot away my colors.” A third would
add, “He shot away my rigging;” while a fourth would say, “He gave me
a shot;” and a fifth, “He gave me a broadside.” Thus, in their rough
way, did they express the impressions made on their minds by the
discourse.

Mr. Thom was a faithful servant of his Master, the Lord Jesus Christ.
He did not rest satisfied with these public efforts, but, during the
week, he visited us for the purpose of serious conversation. Several
of us were really under strong conviction, and would confess, at
these inquiry meetings, and to each other as we paced the yard,
how often we had sinned, even cursing our Maker when on the yard at
night, amid the roaring of the storm, the bellowing of the thunder,
and the angry flashing of the lightning. A happy practical effect
followed. Gambling ceased, cards and shake-bag lost their charms.
The time was spent in reading useful books. Bibles and religious
books were given or loaned to us. Among these were Baxter’s _Call_,
Doddridge’s _Rise and Progress of Religion_, &c. To some extent we
were altered men. Had we remained much longer under these gracious
influences, most of us, I think, would have become experimental
Christians. As it was, the seed was not wholly wasted. Impressions
were made, which, no doubt, have, in many cases, yielded rich fruit
long before this.

My own mind was strongly wrought upon. A singular dream added
to my seriousness. In my dream, I saw myself drowning, while a
fierce-looking soldier was pointing his loaded musket at my head.
Thus death threatened me from two sources. In this extremity my
anguish was very great. All my gracious opportunities passed before
me, but now it seemed too late for salvation. “Oh,” thought I in my
sleep, “what would I give, if this were only a dream! How faithfully
would I serve the Lord when I awoke.” Just at that moment I did
awake, scarcely able to convince myself that the ideal scene was not
an awful reality. That day I eagerly sought the missionary, and sat
with serious delight listening to his instructions. Still I did not
give myself up to the service of Christ. So difficult was it for me
to make the requisite sacrifice of my beloved sins.

Just at this interesting crisis, a glad report of peace between
England and America reached our prison. With joyful faces we
assembled round the good man, when he came that day, to inquire if it
was really so. While he assured us of its truth, he mildly asked “if
it was peace with Heaven;” assuring us that it was a matter of the
greatest importance for us to be at peace with God.

As a memento of our esteem for Mr. Thom, we made him several little
presents. One of them was a hat made from a _bullock’s horn_. The
horn was peeled into narrow slips, these were scraped, split, and
braided like straw, and then sewed together. We also made him a model
of a ship, fully rigged from stem to stern. The missionary received
these marks of our regard with evident pleasure; and, no doubt, when
looking upon them afterwards, offered many a prayer for the salvation
of the prisoners, who were, for many weeks, the subjects of his
anxiety and labors. Blessings rest on him, if he yet lives! Peace to
his ashes, if he slumbers among the dead!

Great was the joy of my companions, when the news reached us that
we were to embark shortly, in the _Cumberland_, seventy-four, for
England. Little was now said or done, except what related to our
departure. With strange, yet common perversity of conduct, serious
matters were laid aside for the one absorbing thought, “We shall soon
be free!” Thus, an event which should have given birth to gratitude
and religious service, only served for an occasion of further neglect
and unthankfulness. How strangely wicked is the human heart!

For myself, the tidings filled me with fear. Directly to America I
would have gladly gone; but to be carried to England, in one of her
ships of war, was like going to certain death. How was it possible
for me to escape detection? How could I avoid meeting with some old
_Macedonians_, who would, of course, recognise and betray me? These
questions had resolved me to volunteer to remain at the Cape, a short
time before, when some of our number were sent to England. Now,
they tortured me beyond endurance. I felt like an escaped criminal
with the officers of justice at his heels. Death at the yard-arm
haunted me day and night, like the fancied ghost of a murdered man,
staring ghastly at the window of his murderer. No one can imagine my
uneasiness, unless he has been placed in a similar situation. I made
many promises to God that if he would carry me in safety to America,
I would cease to be a swearer, and would most punctually attend his
house every Sabbath. These things constituted my highest ideas of
human duty at that time; but even these promises, like those made
during the heat of the battle in the _Macedonian_, were made to be
broken.

After a little delay, we were conveyed on board the _Cumberland_,
where we soon heard the well-known summons of “All hands up anchor,
ahoy!” A cloud of canvas dropped from her gigantic yards; the
sportive breeze came obedient to our wish; and the huge form of the
_Cumberland_, accompanied by a large convoy of merchant vessels,
was borne rapidly along upon the yielding waves. Cape Town, Table
Mountain, the Lion’s Rump, and our prison-yard, were soon left far
behind, leaving no traces of their existence on the distant horizon;
they were to be known to us hereafter only among the images of the
brain--as recollections, not as realities. We had spent eight months
in the prison of Cape Town.

Our treatment in this ship was superior to what we received in the
_Medway_. Instead of the cable tier, we had berths on the upper gun
deck, and our allowance of food was sufficient for our wants.

Arriving at St. Helena, we remained a few days in port. This rough,
rock-bound island had not yet received its future prisoner, the
emperor of France. Here we were removed from the _Cumberland_.
Twenty-four of us were sent on board the _Grampus_, of fifty guns,
the rest were sent home in our old conqueror, the _Medway_; my lot
being cast among the former.

This transfer to the _Grampus_ greatly alarmed me; since the more
men I saw, the greater, of course, was my chance of detection. I
had already escaped being known on board of two seventy-fours; but
I could not promise myself the same impunity much longer. However,
as I saw no one whose face was familiar, when I went on board, I
felt a little more easy. But that night, I had occasion for great
trepidation and alarm. About nine o’clock, I heard the order from
an officer, of “Pass the word for the boy Leech.” This was followed
by several voices hallooing, “Boy Leech! boy Leech!” My heart beat
like a trip-hammer against my bosom, and a cold sweat crept over my
whole body. My shipmates said they meant me; but I would not reply.
After a few moments, I breathed more freely, and the fear of death
passed away. I heard some one saying, “Your master wants you;” which
convinced me that there was a “boy Leech” among the crew of the
_Grampus_, as well as another boy Leech among the American prisoners.

On our passage, we made a strange sail. Coming up to her, to our
infinite satisfaction we beheld the stars and stripes at her
mast-head. “Brother Jonathan has come to town,” said one of our men.
“He is a most welcome visitor,” the rest replied; for indeed “the
old gridiron” never looked so pleasant as it did then. This meeting
confirmed us in the report of peace between the two nations. This was
as gratifying to the crew of the _Grampus_ as to us; for they had
recently heard that the war with France was ended, and they were all
hoping to get discharged. This expectation was defeated, however,
by intelligence from some passing ship, that Napoleon was at Paris
again, with a force of sixty thousand men.

Nothing could exceed the joy of the officers, and the vexation of
the crew, at this piece of information. The former dreaded a peace,
because it would place many of them on half-pay; while the chances of
war inspired them with hopes of promotion; hence they ran alongside
almost every ship in the fleet, shouting, “Have you heard the news?
Bonaparte has got to Paris with sixty thousand men!” Really, some of
them seemed crazy with joy at the idea of protracted war. Not so,
however, the seamen; they longed for peace, since war only brought
them hard usage, wounds and death. While, therefore, the officers
were rejoicing, they were muttering curses and oaths, wishing
Bonaparte and his army at perdition. Nor was it strange that they
felt thus; for the discipline on board the _Grampus_ was excessively
severe. They were constantly flogging in the most harsh and cruel
manner. The _Sirens_ were astonished at what they saw; for on board
our brig, we seldom saw more than a dozen lashes inflicted at one
time, and that not very often.

At last we came in sight of the white cliffs of old England. To
avoid suspicion, I appeared much interested in everything I saw on
the coast, and asked the men all those questions which are natural
to a stranger, when he sees a new country for the first time. These
inquiries they answered with the utmost good humor; for an Englishman
is proud of his country, notwithstanding he may find hard usage from
her hands.

My American friends have frequently asked if my language did not
excite suspicion that I was English. It never did to my knowledge;
indeed, so free was I from English provincialisms, that it was often
remarked to me, that I “needed no protection;” meaning, that I should
be taken for a Yankee, without offering proof.

With all this in my favor, I could not behold myself approaching my
native soil, without many misgivings. To a man who knows a halter
is hanging over his head, everything furnishes cause for alarm; a
piercing look, a whisper, or the sudden mention of his name, is a
cause of disquietude, sufficient to stir his inmost soul. Captain
Nicholson gave me no little uneasiness, by sending for me one day,
just before we arrived in port, to make some inquiries about Mr.
Crowninshield, of Salem, Mass. Luckily, I could say I had seen him;
beyond that, I could give no further information. He supposed me
to be a native of Salem, while I was quaking, through a fearful
expectation of being found nearly as ignorant of that city, as I had
been, on another occasion, of the city of Philadelphia.

At length we reached Spithead, and were removed to an old
prison-ship, called the _Puissant_, which had once belonged to the
French. Here we were treated with great lenity; we were even allowed
liberty to go on shore. Had I dared, I would have run away; the dread
of the halter restrained me! I did not even venture to write, lest my
mother should be tempted to visit me, or even to write; since even a
letter from any place in England, might awaken suspicion concerning
my true character.[25]

After a stay of several weeks in the old _Puissant_, orders came for
our transfer to the _Rover_, a gun-brig, which had orders to carry us
to Plymouth. Here was a double risk again before me. I had to risk
being known by the crew of the _Rover_, and by the many persons who
had known me at Plymouth. However, the good hand of Providence was
with me to preserve me. We reached our port in safety, where, to our
great delight, we heard that the _Woodrop Simms_, of Philadelphia,
was to be the Cartel to convey us to America.

Before we were allowed to tread her decks, however, we had to spend
two or three days on board the _Royal Sovereign_, of one hundred and
ten guns, because the _Woodrop Simms_ was not quite ready to receive
us. Here I was exposed to the gaze of eight hundred men; but none of
them knew me. Indeed, this was my most hazardous situation; for the
_Sovereign_ and _Macedonian_ had sailed in company before the capture
of the latter. Whenever any of her men came near our quarters, I
endeavored to look cross-eyed, or closed one eye so as to appear
partially blind; and in various other ways altered my appearance, so
that even an old shipmate would have been puzzled to recognise me at
first.

At last, the grateful news reached us that the Cartel was ready. We
went on board with great gaiety, where we met our shipmates who had
left the Cape before us. They had been confined in the celebrated
Dartmoor prison, with a number of other prisoners, where they had met
with rather rough treatment and rougher fare. They were present at
what they called the Massacre. Several of the prisoners were detected
in an effort to escape. To strike terror into the poor victims,
Captain Shortland ordered his men to fire in upon them. Quite a
number were killed, and more wounded, by this cold-blooded act;
the rest sought the shelter of the prison walls. Several Americans
suffered in this wanton assault. Our meeting at this juncture was a
source of mutual gratulation.

Our ship was now surrounded with boats containing provisions of all
descriptions. To our surprise, the Dartmoor men bought freely of
everything. Where they obtained their money, we could not imagine. We
learned afterwards that their stock consisted of counterfeit coins,
manufactured by the prisoners! It was well for them that our ship put
to sea before John Bull’s peace officers received information of the
fraud. What a school for every species of vice is opened by war! The
corruptions and vices occasioned by the operation of this system, are
beyond the power of the imagination to conceive.

My feelings were peculiar as I beheld my native land receding from
my vision. I was happy, and yet sad. Happy, because I was now safe;
sad, because I was again leaving the soil which held my mother and my
friends. On the whole, my joyous feelings prevailed.

A few days out, we were hailed by an English frigate. She sent a
boat alongside to make some inquiries, and left us to pursue our
way in peace. We were all in good spirits; our men being divided
into watches to assist the crew of the ship; our officers all snugly
quartered in the cabin, and myself appointed to assist the steward;
an office quite agreeable to one who had lived on prisoners’ fare
more than a year,[26] because it brought me a few of the spare
luxuries from the officers’ table.

One morning, shortly after the English frigate had boarded us,
Captain Nicholson asked me something about Salem. I smiled. He
inquired why I laughed. “Sir,” said I, “Salem is not my native place
by considerable.”

“What do you mean?” asked the captain, looking somewhat puzzled at my
manner of treating the subject.

I then unfolded the secret of my having been one of the crew
captured in the _Macedonian_. They seemed amazed at the risks I had
encountered since the capture of the _Siren_, and congratulated me
very warmly on my really hair-breadth escape from the halter. It was
a fortunate escape indeed, for which I can never be sufficiently
thankful to that All-seeing Eye, that watched for my safety in the
moment of peril.

During this voyage, a great deal was said about quitting the seas
and settling down in quietness ashore. One of our shipmates, named
William Carpenter, who belonged to Rhode Island, had a particular
enthusiasm in favor of farming. He promised to take me with him,
where I could learn the art of cultivating the soil. Many of us made
strong resolutions to embark in some such enterprise. The pleasures
of agriculture were sung and praised among us in so ardent a manner,
that he must have been incredulous indeed, who could have doubted,
for a moment, the certainty of quite a number of our hands becoming
farmers, whenever we should gain the land.

One night we lay in our hammocks, talking with great earnestness
about our favorite scheme, the wind blowing quite freshly on deck.
Said one, “If I ever get home, you won’t catch me on board of a
ship again.” “Yes,” said another; “farmers live well, at any rate.
They are not put on allowance, but have enough to eat: if they work
hard all day, they can turn in at night; and if it blows hard, the
house won’t rock much, and there’s no sails to reef.” While this
and similar conversation was going on, the wind was blowing harder
and harder: from occasional heavy puffs, it at last grew to be a
tremendous gale. Hearing so much wind, though there were hands enough
on deck to manage the ship, some of us got up to assist if we were
needed. It was now blowing most fearfully; the wild howling and
whistling among the rigging, the wilder roar of the angry sea, the
hallooing of the captain, and the impenetrable darkness which lent
its horrors to the scene, were appalling even to a sailor’s breast.
Just as I stepped upon deck she shipped a heavy sea, which drenched
me to the skin. Presently, we heard the crash of falling timbers, and
away went a top-mast, and a yard in the slings. There were now so
many men on deck that we were in each other’s way; some of us went
below and turned in, with the full expectation that our ship would
founder before morning; and thinking it would be as well to go down
in our hammocks as on deck.

While this state of gloomy foreboding continued, some of my shipmates
manifested great alarm about eternity. They prayed aloud, in deep
distress. Others only cursed, and said, as if in bravado, “We are all
going to hell together.” For my own part I kept repeating the Lord’s
prayer, and renewing those promises so often made in the moment of
apparent destruction.

At length the day dawned, revealing the sad havoc made by the winds,
of our masts and rigging. We also saw a number of those dwellers
on the ocean, called Mother Carey’s chickens. Our shattered aspect
reminded me of the _Macedonian_ after the battle, excepting that we
had no wounded and dead about us now. Captain Jones, who had not left
the deck a moment during the night, declared that, though he had
been twenty-five years at sea, he had never witnessed such a gale
before. Our ship was nearly new, and an excellent sea-boat, or she
would have shared the fate of many a ship in that terrible gale. As
the wind abated with the approach of day, we repaired our damages
and proceeded on our voyage, frequently passing vessels which had
suffered as severely as ourselves. This gale was on the 9th and 10th
days of August, 1815. Probably many, both sailors and landsmen, will
recollect this and the September gale of that year, which occasioned
such destruction of life and shipping.

Sailors are superstitious. Our men attributed this mishap to the
presence of some Jonah in the ship. The man they pitched upon, as the
probable offender, was an old sea-captain, who had been cast away
several times. That he had done some fearful deed, was a matter of
undoubted truth among them; but not being so resolute as the mariners
of Tarshish, they did not cast him into the sea; neither did this
liberality on their part cost us our lives, for, after several days
of pleasant weather, we one morning found ourselves safely anchored
at the quarantine ground, near the city of New York.

The crew of the _Siren_ having obtained leave to go on shore,
full of my good purposes to lead a steady life on the land, I
hurried directly to Broadway, to inquire for my former employer,
the kind-hearted boot-maker. To my disappointment, he had gone to
Philadelphia; so that I returned on board, somewhat chagrined at the
failure of my plan.

The next morning we were conveyed, in a large sail-boat, on board the
_Tom Bowling_, an hermaphrodite brig. Here I was congratulated by
the old quartermaster, Lewis Deal, who was with me when we narrowly
escaped capture at the mouth of Salem harbor, while on a fishing
excursion. He said he had felt much anxiety for my safety all the
voyage, especially as it was reported that my former captain had made
strict search for the _Macedonians_ among all the American prisoners
who were carried to England. The kind-hearted old man wept tears of
gladness at my safe return.

While we staid in the _Tom Bowling_, the September gale, mentioned
above, took place. We were right glad, as it broke its fury over
our anchorage in vain, to think we were so safely housed in a good
harbor, instead of being exposed to its wrath on the deep. Many a
brave heart perished in that memorable storm.

The two years having expired for which we shipped, we were paid off.
With the sum of one hundred dollars, I hurried on shore and deposited
my funds in the hands of my landlord, at a sailor’s boarding-house.
Now followed a life of dissipation and folly. The grave resolutions,
passed at sea, to settle down as steady farmers, vanished into
air. Drinking, swearing, gambling, going to the theatre, and other
kindred vices, took up all our time as long as our money lasted. Our
religious vows were equally slighted and forgotten: instead of being
better, we became worse than ever. We felt as if New York belonged
to us, and that we were really the happiest, jolliest fellows in the
world.

For my own part, I fell deeper into wickedness than ever before:
drinking, swearing, and gambling as I had never done on any former
occasion. How could it be otherwise? Who cared for the sailor then?
Not one. He was left to his own depraved heart’s promptings. Bethels
and religious boarding-houses did not then throw their genial
influences round his path, to charm his footsteps to the shrines of
virtue and religion. Near the very spot where the Bethel church
now stands in New York, I have frequently gambled for hours, with a
bottle of spirits on the table, uncaring and uncared for by any human
being. Thrice blessed be the man who first established Bethels and
temperance boarding-houses! They are the sailor’s life-boats, which
snatch him from the gory jaws of the unprincipled landsharks who
fatten on his ruin.

Sometimes, in a sober moment, I thought I would break away from
this wicked mode of life. I even engaged myself to a boot-maker,
to complete my knowledge of his business; but, the dread of the
confinement to the shoe-bench, which my riotous fancy painted as
being worse than a prison, drove me from my purpose, and left me
still among my shipmates.

At last my landlord told me my money was all expended, and that I
must look out for something to do. My shipmates were in a similar
dilemma, their number decreasing every day, as one after another
shipped in the various merchant vessels preparing for sea. Alas!
for our farmers in perspective. Their dreams of ploughing the land
evaporated, leaving them what they were before, and what most of
them remained until death, the ploughmen of the ocean. My landlord’s
gentle hint put a stop to my excesses, for the very sufficient reason
that it was attended with a protest on my further checks for funds.
For a while, I found employment in loading and unloading ships, and
in assisting to fit them for sea. But this proving an uncertain
employment, I was induced to join a number of my fellow-boarders in
going to the rendezvous of the United States brig _Boxer_. Here we
shipped for two years more. I was then eighteen years of age, and was
rated as an ordinary seaman, with ten dollars per month wages. Behold
me then, dear reader, once more on board a man of war, in spite of
all the dangers I had escaped, and the promises I had made to risk
myself no more on the ocean! The next chapter will unfold the events
which transpired while I sailed in the _Boxer_.




                             CHAPTER XI


On shipping in the _Boxer_, I received three months’ advance, which,
excepting a small sum expended for clothing, fell into the hands of
my rapacious landlord. How much this gentleman contrived to filch
from me, it is not in my power to say; but that he was well paid, I
have no doubt. He had my hundred dollars, my advance, all I earned
for working on the wharves, and nine dollars beside, which I obtained
from the purser. All this, according to his account, I spent in
a few weeks, with the exception of a very small sum laid out for
clothing. As I had no means of proving his statements false, there
was no alternative but submission, and a return to a life of toil and
danger, to earn a fresh supply.

As the method by which I obtained the nine dollars, above mentioned,
from the purser, will exhibit one of the modes in which seamen are
sometimes cheated, I will relate it. While in the _Siren_ I drew but
half my allowance of grog. By the rules of the service, I could claim
the balance in money. This I overlooked when we were paid off, but,
when my funds got low, it came into my mind. I proposed to some of
the boys, who had a similar claim, to visit the purser. They only
laughed at me, and said it would be of no use, for he would not pay
it now we were discharged. Finding they would not join me, I went
alone to the City Hotel, where the purser boarded, and inquired
for him of the bar-tender. He came down stairs, and I spread out
my complaint before him. He blustered and said I had no such claim
allowed; I insisted, and told him it was my right, and he must pay
it. Hoping to get rid of me, he told me to call again the next day.
This I did, when he paid me nine dollars. This will show the reader
one of the ways in which poor Jack is plundered, and that too by
GENTLEMEN!

The _Boxer_ lay at the navy yard, whither we were conducted. The
vacillation of a seaman’s character was illustrated before we got
on board, by one of our hands running away: another went a little
beyond the first. He went on board, where he pretended to lose his
hat overboard. Begging permission to recover it, he seized the rope
which fastened the boat to the shore, dropped over the stern into the
boat, and pushing up to the wharf, leaped ashore and made off. Such
fickle-mindedness is not uncommon among sailors.

We lost another of our crew in a more melancholy manner; he was in my
mess, an Englishman by birth, who had just left a British vessel to
enter the American service. He was at work on the main yard, and by
some means or other, losing his foothold, he fell. Unfortunately, he
struck a carronade screw in his descent, which inflicted a terrible
wound. The poor man suffered excruciating agonies for a short time,
and died. We buried him on shore, in a plain coffin, without form or
ceremony. Such are the contingencies which wait to hurry seamen to
the grave!

We were kept busily at work upon the brig for some time; after which
our commander, Captain Porter, came on board. We soon found him to
belong rather to the race of Fitzroys and Cardens, than to that of
Decaturs, Parkers or Nicholsons. He was inclined to tyranny and
severe discipline.

He soon gave us a specimen of his character in a most illegal act
of punishment. We lay alongside the _Hornet_ or _Peacock_, I forget
which. It happened that her captain and most of her officers were
gone ashore one day. Our captain accidentally saw one of her men
engaged in some act of misconduct: instead of entering a complaint
against the man to his own officers, he ordered him to be seized up
and severely flogged, notwithstanding the earnest entreaties of the
offender for pardon. Why the captain of that vessel did not call
Captain Porter to an account for this manifest invasion of his
prerogatives, I never knew, for we put to sea shortly afterwards. An
officer who would thus gratuitously volunteer his services to punish
a man, must be a tyrant at heart. So at least we thought; while many
misgivings, concerning the future, troubled our minds.

As I was now rated an ordinary seaman, and not a boy, as heretofore,
I had a station assigned me in the fore-top, instead of being a
servant to any of the officers. I was also appointed to be one of the
crew of the captain’s gig. This made my lot one of more fatigue and
exposure than in any former voyage; a proof of which, I very soon
experienced. It being now late in the fall, the weather became very
cold. One afternoon, the pennant having got foul of the royal mast,
an officer ordered me to go up and clear it. I had no mittens on; it
took me some time to perform my task, and before I came down one of
my fingers was frozen. Thus it is, however, with the poor tar; and he
thinks himself happy to escape his dangers with injuries so slight as
this.

The disposition of our commanding officer was still further revealed
to my discomfort one day, while we were at work on the cables.
Something I did, not happening to suit him, he gave me a severe blow
on the head with his fist, not far from the place where I had been
previously injured by the malice of the Malay boy. This unmanly blow
occasioned me violent pains for several days.

Since that time, I have felt a peculiar hostility to a practice,
which is lamentably common in some schools and families; I mean that
of rapping children on the head with a thimble, or with the knuckles,
or anything else. The practice is the result of irrational passion,
it is dangerous, and cannot therefore be too severely reprobated. If
it is pleaded as necessary to enforce obedience and ensure respect,
I know it will fail of such effects; it will only excite feelings of
revenge, ill-will and malice.

We now received sailing orders, and were very soon under weigh,
bound to the Balize at the mouth of the Mississippi. On this passage
we had further opportunities of learning the character of our
officers. Although Captain Porter was stern and severe, yet he never
used bad language. He always spoke with the utmost deliberation, but
with such obvious indications of feeling, that we often trembled
to hear his voice. Most of the other officers were by no means
novitiates in the art of swearing; but our sailing-master exceeded
all the rest in this diabolical habit. Whenever it was his watch on
deck, he exercised his voice, and practised the use of his choice
and varied vocabulary of oaths, by hallooing and threatening the
men continually. Whenever we had to set on sail, or to reef, he was
especially diligent in these matters; mingling with his curses,
threats of the lash to those who were tardy, or whose movements did
not exactly suit his taste. If such officers could only apprehend the
profound contempt and bitter hatred with which they are regarded by
their maddened crew, they would both tremble for safety, and despise
their own littleness of soul. No really great man would enact the
childish vagaries of a petty tyrant.

There was one respect in which we were more annoyed in the _Boxer_
than I had been in the _Macedonian_. In this latter ship, none but
the captain could order a man to be flogged; in the _Boxer_, the
lieutenant or the officer of the watch could send a man to the
gangway, and order the boatswain to lay on with a rope’s-end. This
is a liberty which the laws of the navy should prohibit. A man
should be secured the rights of a citizen, as well on the _planks_
as on the _soil_ of his country. True, it may be said, severity of
discipline is necessary to good order in a ship. Not _severity_,
but _strictness_, is what is wanted. Let a strict discipline be
enforced, with pleasant looks, and a “Hurrah my lads, bear a hand!”
and obedience will be more prompt and more perfect than when every
order is accompanied with a “Damn you,” and with an exhibition of the
rope’s-end or cat-o’-nine-tails. Common sense, as well as experience,
will sustain this opinion.

While these matters were passing on board, our little brig was
dashing through the waves in fine style. We arrived at the Balize,
from whence we dropped down to Ship Island, where we took in water.
A share of this severe task fell to my lot, for I was here taken out
of the gig, and placed in the jolly-boat, to make way for a smaller
and lighter lad in the former. We obtained our water by digging large
holes in the sand, into which we placed our casks; the salt water,
by passing through so much sand, would be so thoroughly filtrated,
that by the time it reached our casks it was fit for use. We then
emptied it into ten-gallon kegs, called breakers, which we carried
on our shoulders to the boat. This of itself was hard work, but we
had certain tormentors on this island, which made it a task of much
suffering. These were hosts of hungry, gigantic moschetos, which
assailed our persons, and especially our naked feet, in flying
squadrons, with a ferocity that indicated an uncontrollable thirst
for blood. But even these were not our worst persecutors. They
were attended by armies of large, yellow horseflies, which our men
called gallinippers. These merciless insect savages were always sure
to attack the very spot we had rubbed sore, after the bite of a
moscheto. Their bite felt like the thrust of a small sword; I still
retain scars on my feet occasioned by these fierce gallinippers.

This island bore marks of the battle of New Orleans; for we found
various articles bearing the broad arrow and stamped G. R. We also
remarked several mounds, which had the appearance of being large
graves. We afterwards learned that this was the place where the
British brought their dead, after their unsuccessful attack on the
city of New Orleans.

From Ship Island, we proceeded to New Orleans. This was a laborious
passage; the current ran down the river with amazing force, bearing
huge logs on its bosom, which, if suffered to strike either our bows
or cables, were capable of doing much damage: to avoid them required
no trifling exertions. Sometimes we endeavored to track her, or draw
her along with ropes, as canal-boats are drawn by horses. But, as
this brought us into shallow water, it was abandoned.

The banks of the river displayed large numbers of alligators,
luxuriating on the numerous logs that were fast in the mud. We made
many attempts to get near enough to these scaly monsters to pierce
them with a boat-hook; but they kept too sharp a look-out for us;
invariably diving into the stream before our boat got near enough
for us to strike them. But, if we failed in capturing alligators, we
obtained an abundance of palm-leaf, from the shore, with which we
furnished ourselves with hats.

An instance of our commander’s tyranny occurred while we were
ascending the river. He had requested a seaman, named Daily, who was
somewhat acquainted with the river, to act as pilot. By accident
or negligence, he suffered the brig to strike the bottom, though
without the least injury. The captain flew into a passion, ordered
him to the gangway, and commanded the boatswain’s mate to lay on
with his rope’s-end. I did not witness this flogging, for the hands
were not called up to witness punishment, unless administered by the
cat-o’-nine-tails, but one of my messmates said that he received at
least one hundred lashes. I saw him several days afterwards, with
his back looking as if it had been roasted, and he unable to stand
upright. He wore the same shirt in which he was flogged for some
time afterwards. It was torn to rags, and showed the state of his
back beneath. His object in wearing it was to mortify and shame the
captain for his brutality.

The severity of flogging with the rope’s end is justly described in
Mr. Dana’s excellent book, called “Two Years before the Mast.” Though
not _so_ cruel as the cat, it is nevertheless a harsh, degrading
punishment. Our men used to say that “they would as lief be cut up on
the bare back with the cat, as have back and shirt cut up together,”
as was poor Daily’s. In truth, that flogging was both unjust and
illegal. The articles of war provide, that not more than _twelve_
lashes shall be given for a crime; but here _one hundred_ were
inflicted for _no crime_--for an accident, which might have happened
to the best pilot who ever ascended the Mississippi. But though the
captain was thus rendered amenable to the law, who would believe a
poor sailor? Had he complained, it would doubtless have been to his
own injury; for law, and especially naval law, is always on the side
of the strong. This was not the only case of illegal flogging; but
the justification of these excessive whippings, was found in the
pretended existence of _several_ crimes in the helpless offenders.

On one occasion we were at our quarters, exercising in the various
evolutions of war; now at our guns, and then going through the forms
of boarding an enemy; now running aloft, as if in the act of cutting
down our enemy’s rigging, and then rushing below, as if to board her,
firing our pistols, stabbing with our boarding-pikes, and cutting
on all sides with our cutlasses. In the midst of this excitement,
the movements of one of the men not happening to please the captain,
he seized a cutlass and struck him a tremendous blow with its flat
side; heated with passion, he let it glance as he struck, and the
edge, entering the man’s back, made a deep flesh wound, which was
very sore a long time. Some of our men swore that if they had been
the sufferer, they would have shot the captain dead on the spot! Are
men of such brutal tempers fit to command a man of war? Is it not
wonderful that mutiny is so rare under such a discipline? Such an
officer might do to command a crew of pirates, but not of freemen,
such as Americans feel proud to entrust with the keeping of their
national honor on the deep.

On reaching New Orleans, our ship was overhauled and repaired. We
were sent on board the _Louisiana_, an old guard-ship, but had to
cross the river every morning to assist in working on the brig.
Several of our men, and myself among them, were quite sick here,
owing to the free use of river water. The _Louisiana_ had a number
of men confined on board, for some crime; they wore chains round
their legs, which were fastened to a large ball: the nature of their
offence I did not ascertain.

The effects of Captain Porter’s severity were seen here in the loss
of two of the crew. They belonged to the gig, and ran away while he
was on shore. He made a strict, but unsuccessful, search after them.
To deter others from a like attempt, or because he wanted an object
on which to wreak his vengeance, he gave one poor fellow a cruel
flogging for what, in sober fact, was no offence at all. The man was
on shore, with some others, fixing the rigging, and, for some purpose
or other, had walked a short distance from the rest, without the
slightest intention to run away. But the captain wanted a victim, and
this served for an excuse.

Our brig being finished, we returned on board, and were soon back at
our old station off Ship Island, where we found several other small
naval craft. While here I saw a man flogged through the fleet, or, as
this might more properly be called, the squadron. His was the only
instance of the kind I saw while in the American navy, and, although
his back was most brutally mangled, yet I do not think he suffered
equal to those who are flogged through an English fleet. Still, the
indignity and brutality are the same in _kind_, though differing in
degree: a MAN should never be made to endure it.

Not far from our station, at a place called St. Lewis’ Bay, our
captain purchased some land, and actually sent some of our men to
make a clearing upon it, and to erect a log house. Whether this was
a legal employment of the strength and skill of his men or not, I
cannot decide; but it struck me as being a perversion of the national
resources to his own private benefit. Why should a captain of a ship
of war be permitted to employ the time and energies of his men for
private uses, while an officer of the government, who should employ
its funds for his own advantage, would be charged with embezzlement
and fraud? The cases are precisely alike, except that one uses the
public money, the other what costs that money. It is a fraud on the
country, and an imposition on the men.

A tragic event occurred at Lewis’ Bay on the 4th of July, which
occasioned a fearful sensation throughout the ship. I was sent
thither that day in the launch. Feeling fatigued, I remained with
another in the boat, which was anchored near the shore. After some
time one of the crew, named Thomas Hill, came back for a pistol,
for there were several in the boat, and deliberately charged it.
My companion, an old _Macedonian_, named Cox, asked him what he
wanted with a pistol. Hill, who was a very desperate fellow, told
him to mind his own business, or he would shoot him. Cox, knowing
his character, thought it best to let this insult pass, supposing he
was only going off to shoot a dog or snake, as the latter creature
abounded there. Having loaded his pistol, Hill went off, and we
thought no more of the matter. Presently a man came running down to
the boat to inform us that two of our men were quarrelling. Just
at that moment, we heard the report of a pistol: hurrying to the
spot, described by our informant, we found a shipmate, by the name
of Smith, bleeding on the ground, with a pistol-shot lodged in his
breast by Hill. We gathered round him; in his agony he begged us to
shoot him dead, for his suffering was not to be endured. Supposing he
was dying, our testimony to his statement that Hill was his murderer,
was taken on the spot. The victim was then removed to a suitable
place to be taken care of; the next day he was carried on board the
brig, and from thence to a sort of hospital on shore, where, after
lingering a few days, he died. The murderer was seized and placed in
irons on board the brig. He was afterwards removed to another ship,
but what was done with him I never heard with certainty; it was
reported that he was pardoned.

The cause of this fatal affray was that great instigator of crimes,
RUM. The men were both under its influence; fired with its fumes,
they lost all discretion, and commenced a quarrel: from words they
proceeded to blows. In this struggle Smith had the advantage. Finding
himself worsted, the other ran down to the boat for a pistol. With
this, he returned and threatened to shoot his adversary. Smith
demanded a pistol for himself, that, as he said, he might have fair
play. At that instant his cowardly opponent shot him! Had they both
been sober, this tragedy would never have been enacted. Who can
reveal the effects of alcohol?

From this station we sailed to Tampico, where we lay but a short
time, meeting with nothing worthy of remark, except that we found
abundance of turtle in the river; during the day we could see their
heads peeping up from the river in all directions. At night we used
to send our men ashore to take them. This was done by tracking them
on the sand, whither they went to deposit their eggs. We used to turn
them over on to their backs, and drag them down to the boat. When
alongside they were hoisted on board with a tackle; some of them
weighing four or five hundred weight. They were then killed, and
converted into a soup for the whole ship’s company.

The day after we left Tampico on our passage to Vera Cruz, I was
looking out on the cat-head or starboard bow; seeing a sail, I
shouted, “Sail ho!” when three other vessels hove in sight. These
were all patriot privateers, so we were ordered to our quarters; but
the vessels, discovering our character, kept clear of our guns, and
we pursued our own course.

About ten o’clock, A. M., we saw two more of these privateers,
crowded with men, but mounting only one long gun. Mistaking us for
a Spanish brig, with money on board, they fired most lustily for us
to heave to. We mounted short carronades, excepting two long nines
at the bows, so we bore down, all hands being at their quarters, to
bring our short guns to bear upon them. Meanwhile we kept one of the
long nines in full blast. I was stationed at this gun; and it being
my duty to sponge and load, I had to exert every muscle and strain
every nerve, as, firing only one gun, it was necessary to discharge
it as often as possible. Before, however, we came near enough to
injure them, they discovered what we were, fired a leeward gun in
token of friendship, and hauled off. If they had not, our men very
_elegantly_ observed, they would have found they had taken the wrong
pig by the ear.

We soon came in sight of the beautiful revolving light, which throws
its friendly beams on the port of Vera Cruz, where, as in the former
places, we lay a short time, and then, after visiting some other
ports, we returned to our former station at Ship Island. Here,
however, we remained for only a brief period, before we were under
weigh for New Orleans, from which place we sailed to Havana. Such is
the constant change kept up by men of war on a cruise.

On this passage, I was placed in a position which exposed me to the
punishment of the lash, though by a mere accident I escaped. There
was a habit indulged in among us, which is common among all sailors
at sea; I mean that of stealing a nap during our watch at night.
Seated on the carriage of a gun, or on a shot-locker, with folded
arms, we indulged in many a minute of sweet sleep, notwithstanding
it was contrary to the rules of the ship. To prevent this as much
as possible, the officer of the watch used to give the first man he
caught napping, a handspike, with which he was compelled to walk
the deck until he found another sleeper, to whom he was allowed
to transfer his burden. One night I was caught dozing, and had to
perform the consequent march with the handspike. After walking about,
without success, in search of a sleeper, for some time, I thought it
might be well to try my fortune in the tops. Scarcely had I set foot
on the top, before the officer below cried, “Fore-top, there!”

“Sir?”

“Aloft, and take in the fore-top-gallant sail!”

This order caused every man to spring to his station. Supposing no
one would pass before the mast, I stood my handspike upright against
it. But there happened to be a man, by the name of Knight, dozing
there; and when he was aroused by the command of the officer, he
passed before the mast to get on to the starboard side. As sailors
usually grasp something when aloft, he missed his hold of what he
intended to catch, and seized my handspike, which of course fell.
To my consternation, he fell with it. Tumbling out of the fore-top,
he fortunately struck the foot-rope of the fore-yard, which broke
the force of his fall. When he reached the deck, he came bouncing
on a tall, stout Irishman, named Tom Smith, who, not imagining the
cause of so rough and sudden an assault, roared out, as they both
fell together on the deck, “Och! indeed you have killed me!” Here,
however, he was mistaken; he was more frightened than hurt; and
the innocent cause of his fright was able to resume his duties,
after two or three days’ respite. Very fortunately for my back, the
unlucky handspike was not suspected; and my share in this serio-comic
accident remained a secret within my own breast.

It has often been a subject of surprise to my mind, that men so
seldom fall from the tops, in the long night-watches they keep there.
Often have I stood two hours, and, sometimes, when my shipmates have
forgotten to relieve me, four long, tedious hours, on the royal
yard, or the top-gallant yard, without a man to converse with. Here,
overcome with fatigue and want of sleep, I have fallen into a dreamy,
dozy state, from which I was roused by a lee lurch of the ship.
Starting up, my hair has stood on end with amazement at the danger I
had so narrowly escaped. But, notwithstanding this sudden fright, a
few minutes had scarcely elapsed before I would be nodding again. How
wonderful that more are not swallowed in the hungry deep!

When the weather was rough, we were indulged with permission to stand
on the fore-top-sail yard, or on the top-gallant cross-trees; and, if
the ship rolled heavily, we lashed ourselves to the mast, for greater
safety. I can assure my readers, there is nothing desirable in this
part of a sailor’s duty. In whatever the pleasure of a life at sea
consists, it is not in keeping a look-out from the mast-head at night.

But the most disagreeable of all is, to be compelled to stand on
these crazy elevations, when half dead with sea-sickness. Some
suppose that sailors are never sea-sick after the first time they
go to sea. This is a mistake; it is very much with them as it is
with landsmen, in respect to being sick in a coach. Those who are
of bilious temperaments, are always affected, more or less, when
they ride in a stage or sleigh; while others are never sick on these
occasions. So with seamen; some are never sea-sick, others are sick
only when going out of port, while some are so in every gale of wind.
Mr. Dana mentions some of the crew in his ship, who were sick, after
being at sea two years, as they came to Boston. I was usually sick
after laying some time in port, and have often stood at the mast-head
when so sick that any landsman on shore, in a similar state, would
think it hard if he could not lie abed. For a sailor, there is no
allowance made for sea-sickness; he must remain at his post until it
is time to be relieved.

When we entered Havana, we came to anchor near the Spanish fort, and
fired a salute, which was courteously returned by the Spaniards. We
had been here but a short time, before an Irishman, named Dougherty,
who had formerly deserted from the Spanish garrison, took it into
his head to run away from our brig. This he accomplished by the
assistance of some Spaniards, to whom he made himself known. Several
others also left us, in this port, among whom was our swearing
sailing-master; and a great deal was said about running away
throughout the ship. The man who was flogged on suspicion at New
Orleans, now endeavored to get off in reality. He strayed from the
boat, but the officer, meeting him, endeavored to force him back. He
resisted; a struggle ensued; the officer fell to the ground, and the
man called to the Spaniards to assist him. They left him, however, to
fight his own battles; and the officer, having succeeded in getting
the advantage, presented a pistol to his breast, and he surrendered.
For this offence, he was flogged most fearfully. In the British
service, he would have been hung! It is certain death with them, to
strike an officer.

Hearing so much said about running away, and feeling almost as
unhappy as when in the _Macedonian_, I began to think of it myself.
Sometimes I thought of trying to get into the Spanish garrison as
a soldier; at others, of joining some of the numerous slavers that
lay there, and in which our men said a good chance could be had. Sad
chances, as they now appear, especially the latter; but I was young
and ignorant. My feelings and the advice and opinion of my shipmates
influenced me more than the dictates of an enlightened understanding.
Resolving to make a trial, if opportunity offered, I one day put
on an extra shirt and drew on a second pair of pantaloons. When
thus prepared, the officer of the deck happened to discover the
two waistbands of my trousers; he questioned me with a suspicious
curiosity. I told him as specious a tale as I could invent on the
spot; which was, that I had been mending my trousers, and, before
they were finished, was called to go ashore in the boat, and not
having time to put them away, had slipped them on. Fortunately, a
needle and some thread which I had about me, confirmed my story and
saved me from difficulty. It was pretty obvious, however, that the
officer, though silenced, was not _satisfied_; for I was so closely
watched, after that day, I gave up the idea of escape as utterly
futile and hopeless.

From Havana we returned to the mouth of the Mississippi, where
we captured the _Comet_, a patriot schooner, on suspicion that
the patriotism of her crew had degenerated into something less
respectable. Harsh as it must have sounded in the ears of her
officers, we charged them with piracy; took possession of the
vessel, and brought her hands, as prisoners, on board our brig. Her
master’s name was Mitchell; his crew were all stout, fierce-looking
blacks, having all sorts of odd names, such as Monday, Friday, &c.
She had a rich cargo, and contained large sums of money. It was
reported that they had attacked an island somewhere in the Gulf
of Mexico, and murdered its governor. We put them in irons, with
sentries over them, who were charged to cut off their heads if they
dared to lift them above the hatchway. I performed this duty a part
of the time, parading round the hatch with a drawn cutlass; but they
showed no symptoms of resistance, and were sent in their vessel to
New Orleans. Their fate I never ascertained.

This adventure cost one of our own crew, an Irishman, by the name of
Tom Smith, a severe flogging. Smith was quite a moral philosopher
in his way; though it is to be regretted that his philosophy was
a little infected with lunacy. Its premises were certainly sound,
but, unfortunately, its conclusions bore but little relation to
the parent of whom they boasted. He taught that man was born to do
good; that his chief good was the promotion of his own interests;
and that, per consequence, he should help himself to whatever he
could lay his hands on, without regard to the rights of others. With
these views, Tom earnestly defended the rightfulness of piracy, and
could he have managed to get on board a pirate vessel, or even have
contrived to wrest our own ship from the hands of her officers, and
hoist the black flag, he would have cheerfully done so. But somehow,
although he had made a number of disciples among his shipmates, our
captain paid no manner of respect to his theories; for, when Tom, in
consistency with his often declared principles, deliberately carried
off a large sum of money from our capture, to his own quarters, the
captain, who perceived the theft himself, ordered him to the gangway,
and administered as many hard lashes, as if Tom had had no philosophy
at all.

But, although Tom Smith’s philosophy did not save its unlucky
advocate from the unphilosophic punishment of the whip, it
nevertheless exerted a baneful influence on the morals of our crew.
Many of them were doubtless bad enough when they came on board; but
a more complete school for the practise of iniquity never existed,
than that on board our brig. Profanity, blasphemy, lying, licentious
conversation, and even a system of petty stealing, were practised on
a large scale. Many of the men were ripe for any crime within the
power of depraved humanity to commit, and I have often thought that
even the decks of a privateer or a pirate, could not lead one faster
and deeper into the extremes of wickedness, than did the influence of
our main deck.

With what a voice do such pictures of sailor immorality, call for
exertion on the part of an enlightened Christian community, in behalf
of seamen? Where is the presence of the meek spirit of Christianity
more needed, than on the decks of our merchant and naval vessels?
Where would missionaries and Bibles accomplish more than here? There
is no sphere of Christian usefulness so important, so promising as
this. Every vessel in the navy should have its chaplain. Not one of
your proud, fun-loving, graceless wine-bibbers, but a humble, devoted
man, who would not think it beneath his dignity to mingle with the
common sailors, as a pastor among the flock of his affections,
moulding their rough, but susceptible natures into the image of
virtue, by the force of his pious example, and the influence of
his effectual prayers. Then, in the merchant service, a species of
itinerant missionary might be indefinitely useful. He might be sent
out by a society, pledged for his support; and, by permission of
the owners, sail in a ship on her outward passage. Arrived at her
port, he might sail to another place, in a different ship, and then
return home in a third. In this way, a score of devoted men of the
right stamp, could exert an unparalleled influence on the character
of sailors. Vice, irreligion, profanity, and insubordination, would
presently flee away before the beautiful purity of religion, and
our ships, instead of being designated as floating hells, would
become houses of God, arks of holiness, consecrated Bethels! Pray,
Christian, that this desirable consummation may be speedily attained;
and be not satisfied with merely praying; add _action_ to your
prayers. Stir up your church to the claims of seamen! Give your money
to assist in supporting sailors’ missionaries, Bethels, and the like.
Make it the settled purpose of your heart, not to rest until you
behold the sailor elevated to his proper position, which is that of a
CHRISTIAN MAN!

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                            CHAPTER XII


After a short stay at the Balize, we put to sea once more, for the
purpose, as it was understood, of touching at Havana, and then
returning to New York. This was a cheerful voyage; the idea of a
speedy return to America, spread a feeling of exquisite delight over
the whole crew, and converted the performance of our duty into a
pleasure. One effect was, to set those hands, who were gifted with
the talent, so highly prized in a man of war, of “spinning yarns,”
busily at work during every spare moment, when a group could be
gathered to listen. Foremost among these intellectual time-killers
was Richard Dickinson, a messmate of mine, a good-natured Englishman.
He called himself the son of Old Dick, by which epithet he was
usually called. Dick’s powers were now in great demand, and he
exercised them to our universal satisfaction, but with how great
regard for truth I cannot determine. It is probable, however, that
truth entered very little into Dick’s productions. He was a sort of
off-hand novelist; all he cared for was _effect_, and where truth
failed him, fiction generously loaned her services. So bewitching
were Dick’s stories, that I used to long for the hour when we could
lay in our hammocks and listen. My first salutation, when we lay for
the last time in the port of Havana, was, “Come, Dick, tell us a
yarn.”

“What is the use? you will go to sleep,” he used to reply.

“No I won’t, Dick; I can listen to your yarns all night,” was my
usual answer.

Dick would then begin some yarn, which, if not so interesting as the
thousand-and-one stories in the Arabian Nights’ entertainments, was
at least as true to nature, and, in respect to its humor, might be
compared to some of the sayings of that illustrious personage, Sancho
Panza, the renowned squire of the immortal Don Quixote; but, in
spite of my promises, I usually gave notice of my condition after a
short time, by performing a concord of nasal sounds, vulgarly called
snoring, which would set Dick to swearing, and often put an end to
his performances for the night.

I need scarcely say, that these “yarns” were by no means favorable
in their moral effects on the listener. They generally consisted
in fictitious adventures on the sea and on the shore, plentifully
interlarded in their recital with profane oaths and licentious
allusions. When seamen become elevated, and are properly instructed,
these filthy stories will be superseded by reading good and useful
literature, with an abundance of which every ship should be supplied
by the benevolence of the Christian public.

On the passage to Havana, Dick and myself fell under the displeasure
of the captain. We were stationed one night in the fore-top, where we
were comfortably dozing away the time. The captain was on deck. The
officer of the watch hailed the fore-top. We did not hear him until
the call was repeated two or three times. For this we were ordered
below, and told by the captain that we should be flogged the next day
before the whole crew. With this consolatory information we returned
to our station, without the least inclination to sleep again for that
watch. With a sort of philosophic desperation, I laughed and said,
“Dick, which would you rather do--have your grog stopped awhile, or
take a flogging?”

Dick was very fond of his grog; so he replied, “Oh, I had rather
they would stop my wind than my grog, and would sooner be flogged by
considerable than lose that.” I question, however, if he had been
left to choose between grog and whip at the gangway, whether he would
not have altered his tone in favor of his grog. Still, his answer
shows, how strongly sailors are attached to their beloved rum. I am
happy to know that this regard is dying away, and that temperance is
doing something among sailors. May it go on, until cold water is as
popular in a man of war, as grog was twenty years since. We never
heard, however, of our offence again. Dick was quite a favorite
with the officers, and, except a blow in the head, given me by the
captain, I had never been punished. Perhaps these were the reasons
why we escaped the gangway.

At Havana we got a large amount of Spanish dollars aboard for some
merchants in New York. These were smuggled from the shore. Our men
were sent off in the boats, with their pockets and bosoms well
stuffed with the precious metal; and in this way we soon got it all
safely lodged in our hold, except that the captain’s servant, falling
desperately in love with them, furnished himself with all he could
carry, and ran away from the ship.

After adding to our freight of dollars a fine supply of oranges,
lemons, pine-apples, &c., we cheerfully weighed anchor and set sail
for New York. We reached that port after a short and prosperous
voyage; meeting with no incident, except that the cold weather caused
us a little suffering, and enabled the purser to add a few dollars to
the profits of the voyage, by supplying us with a lot of red flannel
shirts.

When I was on board the _Siren_, I was contented. The officers were
kind, the crew were peaceful and well-behaved; but in the _Boxer_,
some of the officers were severe, and the crew corrupt, and I did
not enjoy myself at all. Some said that in time of war the men were
better treated than in time of peace; but though this may be true
to a limited extent, yet I think the difference in these two brigs
was owing more to the character of their respective officers than
anything else. Be this as it may, my experience in the _Boxer_ had
completely sickened me of man of war life, and I determined, if
possible, to get free of it at once and forever.

My station, as one of the crew of the jolly-boat, gave me frequent
opportunities to accomplish my purpose. So, one day, at the
solicitation of a shipmate, I resolved to make the attempt. Cruel
treatment was my excuse; yet I have sometimes been ashamed of my
course in this instance; and would heartily advise all boys in the
naval service to stay their time out. We were successful in escaping;
and as we had but little money, I therefore proceeded directly from
the shore to a pawn shop, and there disposed of our pea-jackets,
which were new, and for which the purser had charged us ten dollars
apiece. We obtained the pitiful sum of six dollars for the two. With
this, we started in a hack, which was to carry us outside of the
city. We then travelled hard all day, resting at night in a barn,
where we suffered extremely from the cold. The next day we pursued
our way towards New Haven. The day after, we were still on the road.
This was the Sabbath, and we felt strangely at seeing the good people
of the village, through which we passed, going to meeting. The
foot-stoves, that the grave matrons bore in their hands, were things
I had never seen before; so, to the great merriment of my companion,
I observed that they were excellent contrivances to carry their books
in to meeting! We reached New Haven on Monday evening, where we put
up at a sailors’ boarding-house for the night. Here my shipmate left
me, and I proceeded alone to Hartford, begging my support by the way,
for my money was by this time all exhausted.

At Hartford I tried to ship on board some merchant vessel. Not
succeeding, I strove to find some one to take me as an apprentice to
instruct me in the art of bootmaking, but with no better success.
These repulses discouraged me. It was Christmas day, and the
associations connected with the day--the merry-makings of my early
boyhood--were anything but pleasant to me in my distress. The bell
was tolling for the funeral of priest Strong, and it seemed as if
the melancholy of the mourners fully accorded with my feelings, and
was preferable in my mind to the spirit of rejoicing that prevailed
among those who were keeping merry Christmas in merry mood. Perhaps,
if they had invited me to partake of their cheer, I should have
changed my opinion. As it was, with only five cents in my pocket, I
wandered lonely and sad through the city. With a feeling of despair
I stepped into a cellar for something to drink. They charged me five
cents, and left me at once friendless and penniless. At the bridge,
the toll-keeper demanded a cent. I looked at him fiercely, and told
him I had nothing. He let me pass over toll free. Towards night,
feeling tired and hungry, I endeavored to hire myself. But who would
employ an utter stranger? I went to a number of houses, imploring a
lodging for the night. With freezing coldness, I experienced repulse
after repulse, until my heart chilled with horror, with the fear
of spending that long, cold night out of doors. At last I called
on a kind-hearted Presbyterian, who gave me a supper, lodging and
breakfast. Their morning and evening devotions were peculiarly
interesting to me; for, excepting while a prisoner at the Cape of
Good Hope, I had never listened to an extemporaneous prayer.

The next morning I left this truly hospitable family, and pursued my
inquiries for employment. Some asked if I could chop wood; others, if
I knew anything about farming; and when I answered “No,” they shook
their heads, and I trudged on. Sometimes I offered to work for my
board, but, being a sailor, and having no recommendations, people
were afraid to take me into their families. Still I pushed on. A man
overtook me in the town of Coventry, and began a very interesting and
faithful discourse about religion. I listened respectively; he took
me home with him, where, although he was a deacon, he gave me some
cider-brandy: but these were not the days of temperance. After this
he sent me to Pomeroy’s tavern, where he thought they would hire me.
This application failing, he advised me to apply at the glass works
which were a little distance from that place. With this advice, I
took leave of Deacon Cook, and proceeded towards the glass-houses.

Before reaching them, however, night came. A family, who occupied
a red house, received me, whose hospitality I returned by singing
a number of sea songs. Early the next morning, I tried to get work
at the glass-house, but though I was willing to stay for my board,
they would not take me. Mr. Turner, the agent, very kindly gave me
a breakfast, and then I left him, determined to get to Boston if
possible, and go to sea once more.

My situation was really a trying one: my only clothing was a blue
jacket and trousers; shoes more than half worn out, and a little
tarpaulin hat stuck on the back of my head, in genuine sailor
fashion.[27] Mittens and money were alike far off from my fingers,
and friends were as scarce as money. People, too, seemed afraid of a
sailor; and this, in addition to all my other troubles, rendered me
an object of suspicion. At such times, I assure my young reader, that
the picture of a kind mother and a good home, are but too faithfully
presented to the mind, filling it with a thousand vain and useless
regrets. No young man need desire to be in the outcast prodigal
condition in which I stood, in the depth of that cold winter.

When I reached the town of Mansfield, I called at the house of a
Mr. Nathaniel Dunham; the kind manners and friendly language of
whose lady I shall never forget. She told me that if I was honest,
Providence would shortly open some way by which I could live.
Her words fell on my ear like a prophecy, and I left the house,
confident of some favorable turn in my affairs before long. At
Mansfield Four Corners, I inquired of Dr. Waldo, who, with several
others, sat under a piazza, and afterwards of a Mr. Edmund Freeman,
for employ. They gave me no encouragement. Persevering, I at last met
with a Mr. Peter Cross, who, seeing my sailor garb, asked what ships
I had sailed in. Hearing me mention the _Macedonian_, he said, “There
is a man here whose name is William Hutchinson. He was taken in her.
Do you know him?”

“Yes,” said I, after a moment’s recollection; “he was our armorer’s
mate.”

Of course, I lost no time in seeking for my old shipmate. After
crossing various lots, and getting vexed and perplexed for want of
proper direction, I reached his comfortable homestead. He did not
recognise me at first, on account of the great alteration a few years
had made in my size and appearance; but, when he did recall me to his
recollection, with the generous frankness of a sailor, he offered
me all the hospitality and assistance in his power. A good supper
was speedily spread; and then, seated before his ample fireplace,
sparkling and crackling with a cheerful blaze, we recounted our
adventures. He had wandered into Connecticut, and married a very
respectable woman. They now owned a house and some land, and were
in tolerably comfortable and thriving circumstances. With such
discourse, we talked away the better part of the night, when the old
tar showed me my chamber, archly observing that “my bed would not
rock much.”

The next morning, he said I should not leave him until I was
provided for in some way or other. Through his influence, a Mr.
James, his brother-in-law, employed me to work in his cloth-dressing
establishment. As I was ignorant of the business, and was not really
needed, my board was to be my only compensation.

My new situation soon grew delightful to me, and I felt happier than
I had ever done since I left Bladen. My time passed very pleasantly,
especially my evenings, when the neighbors came in to hear me spin
sea yarns and forecastle songs. Some of the young men of the “baser
sort” judged me to be a fit instrument to act Samson for their
enjoyment, in the house of God. So they invited me to attend the
meetings of the Methodist Episcopal church in that place. But they
greatly misjudged the character of seamen; who, as before remarked,
usually pay respect to the ordinances and ministers of religion.
I attended the meeting, but not to make sport. The result of this
ill-designed invitation on myself will appear hereafter.

The winter months fled, and the spring found me unfurnished with
means co-extensive with my wants. Determined to remain ashore, if
possible, I hired myself to a farmer for my board. In the evenings I
braided straw hats, and thus obtained a scanty supply of clothing.
A little incident, illustrative of the thoughtless playfulness of
sailor character, may not be displeasing to my young readers.

Whoever has seen a perfect novice undertake to guide an ox-team,
may form some idea of the ludicrous adventures through which I
passed during my agricultural novitiate with these horned animals.
Perseverance, however, gave me some little control over our team,
when, as fate would have it, my employer “_swapped_” them for another
pair. When they came home, after some little hallooing and whipping,
I succeeded in “yoking” them; then seizing the goad-stick, with as
much dignity as ever Neptune wielded his trident, I mounted the
tongue, (which I called the bowsprit,) and with the ladders rigged up
at both ends I gave the word of command to my team. They, however,
showed signs of mutiny, and, taking to their heels, bore me off in
triumph. This was sport indeed; there I stood, my head and shoulders
passed between the front rigging, laughing as if my sides would
burst, while rakes, forks and boards were playing leap-frog, at the
tail of my cart, and my master’s boy was half frightened out of
his wits. At length the angry voice of my master roused me from my
sportive mood; he did not relish the rough usage his farming tools
were receiving, and coming up with my horned steeds, he speedily
stopped their speed and my sport. I need only add that his rebukes
made me more careful afterwards.

When the haying season commenced, I left my first employer, and
obtained the sum of eight dollars per month, and board; the wages,
however, in accordance with the true Yankee method of making money
out of everything, were to be payable at the village store. This
change led me into a situation which proved another link in the
chain, which ended in my conversion to God. The son of my employer
died; he was about fourteen years of age; in company with a pious
member of the Methodist church, I sat up one night with the corpse.
With the faithfulness of a true Christian, he improved the occasion
by seriously conversing with me on the great concerns of immortality.
His discourse, together with the funeral services, had a very
softening and gracious influence on my feelings, though the only
present, practical effect was a more punctual attendance on the
services of the sanctuary.

Towards winter, I went to live with Mr. Joseph Conant, to learn the
business of filing augers and steelyards. Here my acquaintance was
considerably enlarged, as several young men were attached to the
establishment. Among them was one who made a profession of religion.
As is usual among the young, we were devoted triflers; and he, to my
astonishment, was as jocose and merry as the rest. Ignorant as I was
of religion, his conduct appeared strangely inconsistent; I wondered
he did not converse with me about my soul. One day I took him aside
and faithfully expressed my views of his conduct. He acknowledged
his guilt. Afterwards we attended meetings in company, and he was
faithful in speaking with me about the things that belonged to my
salvation. He urged upon me the importance of giving myself up to
God at once, and affectionately invited me to attend class-meeting.
My mind was seriously inclined, but I could not yet venture upon so
close an intercourse with the people of God.

One Sabbath evening, my friend, Ela Dunham, who had dealt so
faithfully with me, when we watched together over the corpse of Orson
Kidder, asked me, “When do you intend to set out and seek religion?”

I replied, somewhat evasively, “Any time.”

“Well,” said he, “are you willing we should pray for you, and will
you go forward for prayers to-night?”

To this I replied, that I would think of it. The meeting proved to
be intensely interesting. My desire to express the inward workings
of my mind, grew strong. Of the forms and practices of Christians
in revivals, I was altogether ignorant, having never witnessed a
conversion in my life; still, it seemed to me highly proper to
declare my feelings in the presence of Christians, that they might
give such instructions as were necessary to lead me into the right
way. With these views, I determined to rise and speak, though the
evil one whispered, “Not yet! not yet!” in my ears. Just as I stood
up, some one, not seeing me, began to sing; this, I took to be a
suitable excuse for further delay, and sat down, heartily wishing
that no one had seen me. Fortunately, my friend Dunham had witnessed
my movement. He requested them to stop singing, because a young man
wished to speak. Thus encouraged, I told them I was then nineteen
years of age, and it seemed to me too much of life to spend in sin;
that eternity was a solemn idea, and I desired them to tell me how
to prepare to enter upon it with joy. They proposed to pray with me.
We then all kneeled down together. Most fervently did they pray for
the divine blessing to rest on the stranger youth, bowed in penitence
before them, and most sincerely did I join my prayers with theirs
before the throne of God. After prayer, they sung the following
familiar lines, which I insert both for their intrinsic excellence,
and for the pleasantness of the associations connected with them in
my own mind.

      “Alas, and did my Saviour bleed!
      And did my Sovereign die!
      Would he devote that sacred head,
      For such a worm as I?

      O the Lamb! the loving Lamb!
      The Lamb on Calvary,
      The Lamb that was slain,
      Yet lives again,
      To bleed and die for me.”

Although these words were very sweetly applied to my mind, I did not
feel any evidence of the favor of God that night. The next day, with
a strong purpose to live for eternity, I entered on my daily tasks.
Religion was the theme of my thoughts and discourse; during the day,
a sweet calm came over me; peace and joy filled my soul. It was the
pardoning love of God applied to my guilty spirit.

Ah! thought I, this must be religion; but desiring to be right, I
went to my employer and communicated my feelings to him. His reply
rather damped my joy. He was a moralist; morality, he said, was
all-sufficient to secure a man’s well being both in this life and
in that to come. This, however, did not satisfy my mind. To me it
seemed certain that genuine repentance, and a change of heart, were
all-essential to my happiness; and these, if not already mine, I
determined to possess.

The remarks and experience of the Methodists, at their prayer
meetings, were greatly blessed to my comfort. Gradually the light
broke; the day-star shone. Peace, like a river, filled my breast;
joy, as from an unfailing fountain, bubbled up within me; love
animated my affections; by day and by night I sang the praises
of God, and the society of Christ’s dear people seemed precious
indeed to my soul. I thought this sweet frame would last forever. I
determined it should, so far as my efforts were necessary for its
continuance. Alas! I knew not my own heart: a dreary wilderness state
was before me, and I, like many an unwary soul before me, heedlessly
stumbled into its gloomy shadows.

By a sudden change in the condition of my employer, I was led to
seek employment in Ashford. Here, in the shop of Mr. Giles Stebbins,
I was surrounded by many light-minded, trifling young men. Falling
into the same snare for which I had reproved a professor before I
was converted, my peace and calm were lost, every evidence darkened,
and the wretchedness of a backslider in heart filled my soul.
This apostacy lasted several months, when, through the love and
long-suffering of a gracious God, I was once more restored to a state
of salvation. Since that time, though I have not gained all that is
desirable, and that is offered in an abundant gospel, yet I have been
trying to stem the torrent of iniquity, which runs through the earth,
and striving to make my way to the port of Glory.

The next fall I walked eighteen miles to a camp-meeting in Thompson,
Conn., the first I had ever attended. Though the scene was novel, I
soon took a deep interest in the services; especially when informed
that a sailor was going to preach one evening. This sailor was
no other than the well-known Rev. E. T. Taylor.[28] His text was
in Philippians iv. 19: “But my God shall supply all your needs;”
which he handled in his usual happy and eccentric, powerful manner.
I had never before seen a religious sailor; to hear one preach,
therefore, in such forcible and effective style, was to me a source
of unutterable delight. Nor were the listening masses before the
stand, who hung with intense eagerness on his lips, less pleased than
myself. They broke out into loud expressions of praise to God for his
wonderful mercies. “This,” said the speaker, “is but a drop from a
bucket! What will it be when we drink from the mighty ocean itself?”

At this meeting I saw sinners yielding to Christ with tears of sacred
penitence, for the first time in my life. Never in all my life had a
spectacle more sublimely beautiful met my eye. I do not believe the
world affords a more grateful sight than that of a sinner weeping and
repenting before his Creator.

The parting scene of that meeting left an indelible impression on my
memory. Even now I see that affectionate company marching in regular
and joyful procession before the stand, each shaking hands, as he
passed, with the preachers. Still I feel the tears chasing each other
down my cheeks, as I grasped the hand of the sailor preacher so
firmly, that it seemed I should never let it go; while he, seeing my
emotion, observed, “Never mind, brother; we are on board of Zion’s
ship now.” I had stood tearless alike amidst the wailings of the
tempest and the roar of the battle, but here, among a few Christians
at a camp-meeting, my heart was soft as a woman’s, and my tears
flowed like rain. Does the reader inquire what made the difference? I
answer, it was the love of God.

When I returned home, one of my first acts was to unite myself with
the Methodist Episcopal church: an act which has led to the formation
of many pleasant friendships, and which has proved the source of much
religious enjoyment to my soul.

My mind often reverts, with a mixture of joy and sorrow, to the
fate of the three hundred men and boys who sailed with me in the
_Macedonian_, when I left England for the first time. Of these,
alas! how many perished in battle! The rest were scattered over the
four quarters of the globe. Beside myself, I never heard of but one
of them who embraced religion. This was John Wiskey, one of our
quartermasters. He settled in New London, and when he met in class,
for the first time, he said he blessed God he had got out of that
floating hell, the _Macedonian_. He afterwards removed to Catskill,
on the North River, where he maintained a good Christian reputation.

My shipmate, who received me so hospitably in Mansfield, became
unfortunate, lost his property, and died, but not before I had the
satisfaction of offering a prayer at his bedside.

The little fellow who escaped from the _Macedonian_ with me met
with a melancholy fate. This I learned one day from the following
paragraph in a newspaper: “Drowned, out of a pilot boat, off
Charleston Bar, Mr. James Day, one of the crew of His Britannic
Majesty’s late frigate _Macedonian_.” Thus have I been signally
favored--a brand plucked from the fire. For this special favor I hope
to render my heavenly Father the eternal tribute of a grateful heart.




                            CHAPTER XIII


During the various scenes, dangers and wanderings of these years
of my youth, I had not forgotten the home of my boyhood; and, now
that I was becoming somewhat settled in my prospects, I wrote an
affectionate letter to my mother. After a delay of several months, I
received two letters in reply, one from my mother, and the other from
my sister. That from my mother is inserted in this narrative, for the
purpose of exhibiting to the young reader, who may fancy that his
parents feel no very great interest in his welfare, another instance
of the deep, undying love of a mother’s heart.

                                        BLADEN, December 23, 1818.

  My dearly beloved Child:--

  I cannot describe the sensations I felt when I received a letter
  from your dear hands. It was the greatest pleasure I have enjoyed
  since you left me. I have never been sorry but once since you
  left, and that has been ever since; but I hope the Almighty has
  ordered it all for the best. I have never forgotten to pray for
  you morning, night, and many times in the day, though I talked
  very little about you to any one, because I did not wish to make
  any one else uncomfortable. But that God, who knows the secrets of
  all hearts, sees how sincerely thankful I am because he has been
  pleased to hear my prayers that I might hear from you again; for
  I was fearful I never should. But now I have great hopes that the
  blessed Lord will protect you, and spare our lives to see each
  other again.

  My dear child, you have not stated how you came to be separated
  from the crew when the ship was taken, nor how you have been
  employed since. You must be the best judge whether it will be safe
  for you to venture home. It would be a great pleasure for me to
  see you, but if there is danger of bad consequences, on account
  of your having been in the service against your country, and if
  any bad consequence should follow your coming home, it would make
  me more unhappy than I have ever been yet. If there is no danger,
  I should be very happy to have you come home and learn a trade;
  as, thank God, I have it in my power to do something for you; and
  nothing shall be wanting to make you comfortable, that I can do.
  You say it may be one or two years before you come; but pray come
  the first opportunity, as you will be gladly received by us all. If
  it is a want of money that prevents you from coming, and you cannot
  work your passage, perhaps you can get one by showing the captain
  of some ship my letter, and he may depend on being paid as soon as
  you arrive in England. If neither will do, send me word; and if
  there is any place in London where your passage money can be paid,
  I will pay it there for you. You are right in supposing yourself
  twenty-two years of age on the nineteenth of March (1819). Your
  sister Maria is twenty. She is grown a fine young woman; I am happy
  to say is very steady and thoughtful; though not of a very strong
  constitution. She is at service in London. She has written to you,
  and I hope you will receive her letter with this.

       *       *       *       *       *

  I hope, my dear child, you will not fail to come home. Send me all
  the particulars of your life, at the first opportunity. I am afraid
  you have gone through a great deal of trouble and hardship since
  I saw you. But the merciful Lord has been pleased to bring you
  through the whole, and He is able to carry you through more, if you
  put your trust in Him. It gave me great comfort to hear that you
  are so well disposed, as I am sure you are, from the spirit of your
  letter; it was more pleasure to me than if you had gained all the
  riches in the world. I wish I was as well acquainted with religion
  as yourself; but I will try to make a better use of my time, and
  should it please God to let you come home, I hope you will be the
  means of great good to me.

  There are a number of Methodist meetings about us. The people
  who live in our yard are very strict ones. I never disliked the
  Methodists; I think they have a great gift of religion. I sent
  your letter to Lady Churchill, formerly Lady Francis Spencer.
  Both Lord and Lady Churchill were glad to hear from you, and are
  your well-wishers. The Duke and Duchess of Marlborough are both
  dead. Blenheim is much altered for the worse, since his son has
  become Duke. Lord Francis, that was, makes a very good master; and
  when the Duke died, he left Blenheim. His country house is in the
  forest. Your father is his carpenter in the timber yard; he has
  filled this situation six weeks. He comes home every Saturday; and
  next spring they are going to place me and the children in a lodge
  near him. We hope to have the happiness of seeing you there.

       *       *       *       *       *

  It is eight years the twelfth of last July, since you left us.
  * * * Your father, brothers and sisters all join with me in hearty
  prayers to Almighty God, that his blessing may be upon you; and if
  it is his blessed will, we shall see you again; if it is not, we
  must be resigned to what is fitting for us, and pray that we may
  all meet in heaven, where all tears shall be wiped away. That God
  may bless you, my dear child, is the sincere prayer of

                                 Your ever loving mother,
                                                     SUSAN NEWMAN.

Notwithstanding the earnestness of my mother’s spirit, breathed out
so ardently for my return in this letter, I dared not risk myself on
British soil. Her expression of sorrow, if bad consequences should
ensue, had its weight in determining me to remain; but a conversation
with the celebrated Lorenzo Dow, who had recently returned from his
English tour, settled the question. He said he had seen four men
hung, who, like me, had been in the service of some other country,
after deserting from their own. This was quite sufficient; for, much
as I longed to visit the homes of my childhood, I had no disposition
to do it with a gallows suspended over my head. I therefore wrote
my mother, that, not having a regular discharge from the navy, it
would be best for me to continue where I was; but I begged them to
seriously think of emigrating themselves; since my father-in-law,
being an excellent carpenter, could do well in New England. Alas! it
was not for him ever to consider of this proposition; for, when my
letter arrived, they were performing the sad obsequies of death over
his breathless corpse. A prevailing fever had terminated a life of
fifty-seven years, after a sickness of two weeks. My mother, now a
widow the second time, after twelve years of pleasant union with her
last husband, thought it unfitting, at her time of life, to venture
across the ocean; and therefore all my plans for collecting my
relatives on American soil, were blasted in the bud.

Perhaps, after following me through the changes of my life at sea,
the reader may feel a little interest in knowing how I succeeded
as landsman. He has seen me escaping the breakers that met me on
my first approach to the shore; and now, if his patience be not
entirely exhausted, he may pursue my fortunes a little further.

He left me, when my episode about home led him away from the
thread of the narrative, busily at work as a filer of steel-yards,
at Mansfield, Conn. From thence, I returned to Ashford, where I
continued a year or two. At last, doubting the stability of my
employer, and fearing lest what he owed me might be lost, I took up
the whole in the shape of a wagon and a stock of steel-yards; then,
purchasing a horse, I travelled from place to place to sell them; and
in this manner got into a business which I have followed more or less
ever since. After acquiring, by economy and diligence, a few hundred
dollars, I opened a small store in Mansfield, with the intention of
leading a still more settled life; though about that time my mind was
strongly exercised with a desire to devote myself to the religious
benefit of seamen. My sense of unfitness for so great a work, at last
prevailed; and I proceeded with my plans of worldly business.

The days of which I write were those on which the bright star of
temperance had scarcely shone. Ministers, deacons, Christians, all
used the deadly drinks. Was it surprising, therefore, that I, but
so short a time before a rum-loving sailor, fell into the common
current, and became a rum-seller? No, it was not strange! but it was
a strange, a glorious display of restraining grace, that prevented me
from being drawn into the snare I was thus thoughtlessly spreading
for the poor drunkard.

But even in those early days of temperance, I was not without
my trials of mind in respect to the unholy traffic. Once, when
at Hartford, making purchases for my store, of which rum formed
no inconsiderable article, I accidentally heard of a lecture on
temperance, to be delivered at Dr. Hawes’s[29] church. This was the
first discourse on the subject I ever heard. The speaker excited
a deep interest in my mind, as he told of the origin of rum, its
primary costliness and rank among medicines, of the growth of
distilleries, the consequent decline in its price, and the attending
spread of drunkenness. So deadly a plot against the peace of the
world, he said, could only have been contrived in hell.

This discourse fell like a light on some dark opaque; it illuminated
my understanding, disturbed my conscience. No sleep visited my eyes
that night. Duty said, “Send back your team without rum in the
morning.” Fear of men, public opinion, interest said, “No. Every
other store-keeper sells it, and so may you.” The latter argument
prevailed. Conscience was rebuked; the rum went to my store.

Shortly after this struggle, I married a member of the Methodist
church in Hartford. We removed to Somers, Connecticut, where I
continued to sell rum, though, as before, with great caution and
with much inward struggling of mind. At last I could hold out no
longer, and in spite of the example of ministers, (some of whom often
drank, though sparingly, at my house,) in spite of the sneers of the
scornful, and of the fear of loss to my trade, I gave it up! It was
for the poor, untaught sailor to set the example of sacrifice to the
store-keepers of Somers. Three others imitated me in a short time.
Not to me, but to the grace of God, be the glory of my decision and
resolution. I can assure the modern rum-seller, whose lashed and
tortured soul still cleaves to the rum barrel and the toddy stick,
for the sake of the profit, that I have ever regarded that act as
among the best of my life.

Finding my present residence ill adapted to a successful prosecution
of business, I closed up my concerns, and removed to Wilbraham,
Mass., the place of my present abode; a pleasant town, but which is
rendered more so by the very superior opportunities it affords for
the education of children, in its most excellent and flourishing
academy.

Here my life glided pleasantly and quietly along, affording no
incidents worthy of special record. Happiness presided at my domestic
board, prosperity accompanied my temporal enterprises, and religion
reigned as the ruling genius over the whole. My ways were committed
unto the Lord, and he directed my steps; for which I praise him with
my whole heart.

In this delightful manner several years fled away; when, my business
having led me, on one occasion, to New York, I heard that my old
ship, the _Macedonian_, was in port. Animated with that regard for an
old ship, which always inspires a genuine seaman, I went on board.
She was so altered, I scarcely recognised her. Change, with an
unsparing hand, had remodeled the decks and cabins, so that I felt
somewhat lost where once every timber was familiar. This was rather
a disappointment; however, I stood on the spot where I had fought in
the din of battle; and with many a serious reflection recalled the
horrors of that dreadful scene. The sailors, on witnessing the care
with which I examined every thing, and supposing me to be a landsman,
eyed me rather closely. Seeing their curiosity, I said, “Shipmates, I
have seen this vessel before to-day: probably before any of you ever
did.”

The old tars gathered round me, eagerly listening to my tale of
the battle, and they bore patiently, and with becoming gravity,
the exhortation to lead a religious life, with which I closed my
address. They appeared to be very susceptible of religious feeling;
as, indeed, sailors are generally. Should any doubt this fact, let
them hear the Rev. Mr. Chase, in New York, or Rev. E. T. Taylor,
in Boston, in whose usually crowded houses of worship, the face
of the rough, weather-beaten son of the ocean may be seen bedewed
with penitential tears; especially at the church of the latter
gentleman--than whom none know better how to adapt discourse to a
sailor’s soul.

During the flight of these years a constant correspondence had been
kept up between me and my mother. She had constantly urged me to
revisit my native land. To remove the last obstacle, she addressed a
letter to Lady Churchill, to ascertain if I might safely return. She
sent her the following note, the original of which is still in my
possession:

                                  Lower Brook Street, Nov. 7, 1821.

  MRS NEWMAN,--

  I consulted my brother William upon the subject on which you wished
  for advice, as neither Lord C. nor myself could undertake to
  answer your inquiry; and I am glad to hear from him the following
  explanation in reply: “There is nothing to prevent Mrs. Newman’s
  son from coming home; for when the war was terminated, he was safe,
  even if he had entered into the enemy’s service; but he will of
  course forfeit the pay and any prize money due to him.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                       I am, much yours,
                                                     F. CHURCHILL.

This note relieved me of all fear, but now it had become no small
undertaking for me to go to Europe. To go alone would be very
expensive; but to take my family, consisting now of a wife and three
children, was much more so. Hence, I put it off year after year,
still writing and begging them to visit me. When the late lamented
Dr. Fisk[30] was in England, he visited my mother and brother, and
related to them some of the facts in my life, which he had often
heard me mention. She sent me two silver table spoons, which had
belonged to my father, by the Doctor’s hands. My mother wrote about
this visit of that “great, good man” with evident satisfaction.

At last, I received a letter from home, which decided me to undertake
the often postponed and long delayed voyage to my native land.
This letter stated that there was a young man in Albany, with whose
friends they were all well acquainted, and that he was about to
visit his mother. I found this gentleman, whose name was William
Warrington, and agreed to join him with my family in his intended
voyage. This agreement made, we set about making preparations for the
undertaking. If the reader desires to know the events of that visit,
he must consult the ensuing chapter.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




                            CHAPTER XIV


Weighed down under a pressure of despondency, arising partly from
temporary illness, and partly from the greatness of the enterprise I
had undertaken, and whose event was so uncertain, I left Wilbraham
on Thursday morning, June 3d, 1841. A pleasant passage, by the way
of Springfield and Hartford, brought us into New York early the next
morning. By the following Monday, the 7th of June, we were all snugly
stowed in a state-room of the second cabin[31] on board the splendid
packet-ship, _George Washington_, bound for Liverpool.

Before we sailed, however, I was fleeced of seven dollars by the
cook of the ship. As passengers in the _second_ cabin, we had the
privilege of furnishing ourselves with provisions. For the sum just
mentioned, the cook had agreed to do all our cooking at the galley,
insisting, however, on being paid in advance, because, he averred,
several passengers, on former occasions, had obtained his services
and failed to pay him; besides, he wanted to leave all the money he
could with his wife. These arguments were, of course, unanswerable,
and I paid him the sum demanded. Judge, then, of my surprise, when, a
few minutes before we hauled off, the captain engaged another cook;
the first having suddenly made himself among the missing. Should the
reader ever have occasion to voyage, he may profit by the remembrance
of this anecdote.

We then hauled off into the stream; towed by a steamboat, we soon
cleared the harbor of New York. Sandy Hook speedily lay behind us;
the pilot wished us a pleasant voyage, and away we dashed into the
wide Atlantic, buoyed up by the confidence of the hope that a few
weeks would behold us safely landed on the shores of dear old England.

The details of a voyage across the Atlantic have been so often laid
before the public by travellers, that they have now lost most of that
interest which they would possess were they less familiar. I shall
not, therefore, detain the reader with the particulars of my passage,
except to quote the experience of one day from my journal.

Saturday, June 12th. Went on deck early in the morning; found it
very warm. We passed two ships on the same course with ourselves. I
saw a rainbow on our starboard quarter, which reminded me of the old
saying among sailors, “Rainbow in the morning, sailors take warning.”
It was then blowing a stiff breeze from the west. All the sails were
up, studding sails out below and aloft. The wind increased during the
morning, with rain. We soon had heavy thunder, with sharp lightning;
the weather growing squally, we took in our studding sails. Passed
another ship; wind increasing with violent rain.

One o’clock, P. M. Sailors have plenty to do to shorten sail. Furled
top-gallant sails, reefed mizzen topsail, fore topsail, and main
topsail. We are running before the wind like a race-horse, at the
rate of twelve knots an hour.

Two o’clock, P. M. More thunder and lightning, which threatened
vengeance on our poor ship. The lightning is very sharp; we have no
conductor up; it plays all around us, and, as it strikes the water,
it hisses like red-hot iron. Several of the sailors felt a shock
in descending the rigging, especially the first and second mates.
We expected it would strike us every moment, but a kind Providence
protected us. The sea runs very high, and the ship flies about as if
crazy. We have two men at the helm, who can scarcely keep her right;
it seems that she will pitch under every moment.

Eight and one-half o’clock, P. M. Sea still rolling heavily; we have
shipped several heavy seas.

Nine o’clock, P. M. Wind has shifted, and the weather is clearing off.

During the whole of this gale, many of the passengers were much
alarmed, and some of them spent their time in praying and crying to
the Lord. How strange that men will leave their eternal interests to
an hour of danger, and forget them again the moment it passes away!

The first Sabbath of our life at sea, by permission of Captain
Barrows--who, by the way, was a very gentlemanly, kind commander--I
held a religious meeting on the quarter or poop-deck. My audience
contained all the cabin passengers, with most of those in the
steerage, the captain and his mates, together with most of the crew.
I told them I was not a parson, but I would talk to them as well as I
could. After singing and prayer, I spoke from Jonah i. 6; alluding,
among other things, to the late storm, and exhorting them not to
trust to storm religion, but to become the followers of God from
genuine principle. My audience favored me with profound attention.
Whether they were benefitted or not, the great day must determine.
It was in this same ship that the eloquent Robert Newton returned to
England. He favored her crew and passengers, every Sabbath of the
voyage, with one of his excellent and powerful discourses.

The following Sabbaths, owing to the weather and adverse
circumstances, I contented myself with distributing tracts and with
discoursing personally with the passengers and crew.

On the 26th of June, we saw the Irish coast on our weather-beam, and
on the evening of the 27th, we came to an anchor off Liverpool, after
a short passage of twenty days. Here, a steamboat came alongside,
bringing several custom-house officers, who came on board, and
carrying our cabin passengers ashore. The next morning we hauled
into the magnificent docks of this celebrated city of commerce,
where our baggage was landed under the spacious sheds that surround
the wharves. From thence it was conveyed, in small carts, drawn by
donkeys, to the custom-house for inspection. This tedious process
over, the passengers separated, each bound to his respective home;
for, having passed the ordeal of the custom-house, every man is left
at full liberty to go whither he pleases. I and my family proceeded
to a tavern, contrasting, as we went along, the dark, dingy aspect
of Liverpool, everywhere discolored by the fumes of coal-smoke, with
the light, cheerful aspect of our American cities; and giving the
preference to the latter, notwithstanding my English prejudices.

The next morning we all took seats in the railroad cars for Stafford,
some seventy miles distant from Liverpool. After passing through the
tunnel, under the city, of more than a mile in length, we emerged
into a beautiful country, adorned on all sides with antique buildings
and rural scenery. These passed before us like the scenes in a
panorama, and, by ten o’clock, A. M., we reached the stopping-place,
a short distance from Stafford. Here we were literally in danger of
being torn asunder by the eagerness of two hackmen, who, as we were
the only passengers left at the _dépôt_, were especially zealous for
our patronage. A police officer, one of whom is stationed at every
_dépôt_ on the road, speedily relieved us from their importunity.
Stepping up, he asked me which man I would employ. Pointing to one of
them, the other dropped my baggage, and in a few minutes, we were at
the door of my brother-in-law, Mr. William Tills.

Although I had not seen my sister for thirty years, yet, no sooner
did she see me, than, throwing her arms around my neck, she
exclaimed, “Oh, my brother!” I need not add, that our reception was
cordial, and our stay with them characterized by every trait of
genuine hospitality.

The town was alive with the bustle of an election; flags and
streamers were floating over every tavern-sign and public building.
Men, women and children crowded the streets, flushed with the
excitement of party rivalry, while the continual pealing of the bells
added a vivacity and liveliness to the scene, of which an American,
who has never heard the merry ding-dong of a full peal of bells, can
form no adequate conception. By five o’clock that afternoon, the
polls closed, and the ceremony of chairing the successful candidates
took place. First came a band of music, playing lively airs; next
followed the members elect, richly dressed, with ribbons on their
hats, and seated on chairs wreathed with flowers and ribbons, and
surrounded with banners bearing various devices. These chairs were
borne on men’s shoulders, who proceeded through the streets, amid
immense cheering from the crowds who followed, and from the ladies
and citizens, who appeared waving their handkerchiefs from the
windows; the members, meanwhile, bowing, with their hats in their
hands, until they reached the spot where their chaises waited to
convey them to their respective homes. The sight was one of great
interest to a stranger, and I advise every American who visits
England, by all means, to witness an election day if possible.

We remained with my brother-in-law about a week, visiting the
various places and buildings whose antiquity or public character
clothed them with especial interest. The town itself contains about
eleven hundred inhabitants, and is the shire town of the county of
Staffordshire. Its chief business is the manufacture of shoes. Among
its ancient buildings, are the remains of a baronial castle, whose
moss-covered battlements insensibly conduct the meditations of the
beholder back to the days of feudal grandeur and knightly chivalry.
St. Mary’s Church is also a venerable Gothic structure, of solid
masonry, whose walls have withstood the storms and changes of about
ten centuries. They were about to expend £10,000 in repairing the
dilapidations of time. I heard one discourse from the curate, and was
especially delighted with the grandeur and sublimity of the music
from its magnificent organ, as it pealed along the aisles of the
time-worn building, with an effect never witnessed in our smaller and
more modern structures in America.

Here also is the county prison, modelled, in most of its
arrangements, after the state-prisons of America. It contained five
hundred prisoners. A lunatic asylum and a hospital, or infirmary, for
the poor, are found among the products of its benevolence: the former
contained three hundred unfortunate occupants.

The poor-house is a large commodious building, constructed of brick
and stone, surrounded with large airy yards and gardens. It has
also yards or courts within its walls, used as play-grounds for
the children. The order within was excellent; every room looked
remarkably neat and clean; the children were comfortably clothed,
and wore an air of satisfaction and contentment. The whole house
was under the control of a governor and matron who were subject to
the inspection of the board of overseers, chosen by the people.
One excellent rule of the house struck me as being very useful:
it provided for the admission of poor travellers to a supper and
lodging; requiring them, if dirty, to undergo a thorough ablution
and to change their linen. In the morning two or three hours’ work
was exacted as payment, and they were suffered to depart. The house
had its teacher and chaplain; and altogether I thought that a great
improvement had taken place in the poor-laws of the country.

Having been so long away from England, everything peculiarly English
struck me with almost as much force as it would a native American.
Hence, my feelings revolted at the sight of the innumerable beggars
and vagrants, who crowded the streets. Italians, with their organs,
white mice, or monkeys; poor barefooted children, with their baskets
of matches; and, worse than either, houseless families imploring a
crust for their half-naked little ones, with many a tale of sorrow
and woe, were sights which greeted my eye and pained my heart every
day. A sad spectacle indeed, and one which robs the lustre of the
British crown of many a brilliant ray. The true glory of a people is
their internal prosperity, and not the extension of their territory.

The fifth of July renewed the excitement of the day I arrived. It was
the time appointed for the _county_ election. Similar scenes to those
before described took place, accompanied with excessive drunkenness.
Every tavern, and the number seemed endless, was crowded, mostly with
the laboring classes, who were spending their hard-earned pence, for
foaming tankards of English ale, the favorite beverage of John Bull,
and one of the greatest hindrances to the progress of the temperance
cause in that country; though it is hoped that the triumphs of
tee-totalism will ultimately overcome this national love for John
Barleycorn, as beer is humorously called in the old song.

After spending an extremely pleasant week in Stafford, we bade adieu
to my affectionate sister and her husband, and, aided by omnipotent
steam, we soon reached the great manufactory of Britain--Birmingham.
From thence we took stage for Woodstock, subject, however, to the
incessant exactions of the host of waiters, guards and coachmen,
that constantly assail the traveller in England, with a request to be
“remembered” for every little service rendered. The country through
which we rode was delightful; all nature wore her greenest, brightest
garments; the roads were level, and as smooth as the most thorough
Macadamizing could make them. Soon after seven in the evening, the
stage drew up at the Marlborough Arms, the very hotel from whence
I started thirty years since to go to sea. The first object that
arrested my eye, was the revered form of my mother, waiting on the
sidewalk, eager to embrace her much-loved, but long-absent son.
Springing to the ground, I felt myself locked in her fond embrace.
That was a moment of exquisite enjoyment, both to me and to my
mother. Though deeply moved, she maintained a calm dignity of manner.
In a few moments, she was showing the way, with the agility of a
young woman, leading a new-found grand-child in each hand, to her
residence, which was close at hand. Very soon we were all seated
round the well-loaded board, the happiest family party in the world.

Though it afforded me and my family great pleasure to visit scenes
round Woodstock and Bladen, which had been familiar to me in my
boyhood, yet, as the description would only prove tedious to the
reader, it is omitted. A brief account of our visit to Oxford, so
celebrated for its university and colleges, may not be uninteresting.

Oxford contains nineteen colleges and five halls. Of these, we
visited only Christ Church and Lincoln colleges. Christ Church is
the largest college in Oxford. We were forcibly struck with the
magnificence of the octagonal tower, which is over the principal
gateway. It has a dome top, and is ornamented in the Gothic style,
from designs by that renowned architect, Sir Christopher Wren. It
is also remarkable as containing the celebrated bell, known by
the familiar name of “Great Tom,” and weighing 17,000 pounds. It
is 7 feet 1 inch in diameter, 6 feet 9 inches high, 6⅛ inches
in thickness. I got under this massive piece of metal, and found
abundant room to move about; by standing on the clapper I could reach
the top over my head. This is the largest bell in England; though
Russia contains several of a much larger size. I also gratified
myself by a survey of the splendid picture galleries and the
spacious library, the former containing some of the finest specimens
of painting in the country, and the latter a large and valuable
collection of books, manuscripts, prints, coins, &c.

I made inquiries of our attendant for the room in which Charles
Wesley studied while a member of this college; but, although
quite communicative on other subjects, he manifested a peculiar
sensitiveness on this; and I declined pressing the question. After
quitting the college, happening to pass the residence of the Wesleyan
minister, Mr. Rodgers, I called upon him, and related to him how the
porter avoided my questions. He smiled, and said that they regarded
the Wesleys as dissenters, and would therefore do them no honor. Mr.
Rodgers was extremely obliging; he conducted us over his beautiful
chapel, and then bore us company to Lincoln college, where he
pointed out the room in which John Wesley studied when a member of
this institution. He also showed us the other localities of Oxford,
made sacred to me by their association with the person of Wesley’s
grandfather, the preaching of the Wesleys themselves, and the studies
of Dr. Coke, the great missionary hero of the Methodist church.

He then led us into Broad street, to the consecrated spot where
Latimer, Ridley and Cranmer sealed their faith by enduring a martyr’s
death. Three stones mark the spot where their ashes fell; and never
did I feel a holier feeling than that which thrilled my heart, while
I and my family stood on those time-worn stones: the spirits of the
martyrs seemed to hover around us, breathing the same high, religious
determination into our minds that filled their own bold and daring
spirits. That moment amply repaid us for all the toil of our journey
home.

The following Sabbath I attended the chapels of the Wesleyans at
Woodstock and Bladen, and in the evening had the pleasure of saying a
word to my old Bladen associates, in the prayer-meeting.

After receiving the utmost kindness, hospitality and evidences of
friendship from my family and friends, I took leave of them forever.
Many of the neighbors, with my mother, accompanied me to Woodstock.
There I wished her adieu, and when the coach whirled away, she
stood following us with her eyes, the last of the company, until a
projection of the park wall hid us from each other. Who could forbear
a tear in such a moment? I could not, and therefore suffered the big
drops to roll down my cheeks at will. There is a luxury in such grief.

That evening beheld us rolling through Hyde Park into the city of
London, where I tarried a few days with my brother, by whom I was
very cordially entertained. Here also I found several cousins, in
prosperous circumstances whose kindness contributed not a little
to my enjoyment. Having visited St. Paul’s, the Museum, Madame
Tussaud’s magnificent collection of wax figures, and other curious
and remarkable places, I took a trip to Walthamstow, the former
residence of my aunt Turner. This good lady was dead, and almost
forgotten by the people; her twenty-two children were all either dead
or wandering, the neighbors knew not whither. Alas for the mutations
of time!

A walk of two miles farther on, brought us to Wanstead, my
birth-place. Here everything seemed natural, though great changes had
passed over the people since I lived there, a thoughtless child. My
common school teacher and my Sunday school teacher had gone to their
spiritual destiny. My aunt was yet alive. My brother asked her if
she knew me. Peering through her spectacles, and summoning up the
imagery of the past, she at length called to mind her former protégé,
and clasped me to her arms, with evident gratification. It occasions
melancholy feeling to see the ravages of time on the persons and
places one has not visited for years!

After a hasty visit to that noble home for the worn-out sailor at
Greenwich, and a glance at the arsenal at Woolwich, I returned to
London.

We next visited the City Road Chapel, built by the exertions of the
great Wesley himself. The sexton told us that when that wonderful man
held the collection plate, one Sabbath, it was thrice filled with
gold by the enthusiastic generosity of the congregation: a striking
example of his personal influence over his hearers. After examining
the chapel, I walked over the parsonage adjoining, and while standing
in the room where, with his dying lips, the immortal founder of
Methodism exclaimed, “The best of all is, God is with us,” I felt
inspired with his great spirit, and mentally resolved, like him to
laboriously live, that like him I might triumphantly die. From this
sacred chamber I visited the tombs of Wesley, Clarke, Benson, Watson,
Cooper, and other illustrious men of the departed army of faithful
warriors in the cause of Christ; and, as I stood over their ashes, my
heart said with Peter on the mount of transfiguration, “Master, it is
good for me to be here!”

Crossing the road into Bunhill fields, I stood before the tombstones
of the celebrated Dr. Isaac Watts, and the less learned but equally
renowned John Bunyan. Here the wicket gate, the wanderings of the
pilgrim, the land of Beulah, and the river of death passed vividly
before my mind’s eye, until, overcome with a rush of powerful
feeling, I wept and walked away, a better man than when I entered
those solemn resting-places of the glorious dead.

The time allotted for my visit having nearly expired, my mind began
to look towards the country of my adoption, filled with a strong
desire once more to tread its free soil. Strong as is the love of
home, it was not strong enough to induce a preference in my mind for
England. America had become the dearer of the two. Indeed, I saw
so many unpleasant things amidst the grandeur and pageantry of the
rich, that I often felt disgusted. Such hosts of street beggars,
such troops of poverty-stricken children, such a mass of degraded
laborers, such enormous taxation, made me shrink from bearing any
part of so great a burden, and desire to link my future destiny
with the rising fortunes of America. How the laborer of England
lives, with such low wages, and such high prices for the staple
commodities of life, is above my comprehension. Meat was from twelve
to twenty-four cents per pound; tea from one to two dollars; coffee
from twenty-five to forty cents, and other things in proportion.
To this add the intemperate habits of the poor, and how they live
becomes a problem I know not how to solve. Yet, with all this poverty
and woe, taxation is laid upon the public with merciless severity,
to furnish means to maintain the splendor and fatten the minions of
royalty. First, they have to pay the annual interest of eight hundred
million pounds, then come the enormous salaries of the monarch and
the satellites of the throne. The queen, for her private purse, has
£150,000; the queen dowager, £100,000; Prince Albert, £30,000; the
Lord High Chancellor, £20,000; the Bishops, an average of £20,000
each. Besides these, follow sinecures and pensions innumerable,
until the resources of the nation are preyed on by the throne,
with the unsatisfied appetite of the grave--taking all, and still
crying, “give, give!” I felt happy, when beholding these things,
that Providence had, after many trials in early life, cast my lot in
America.

On the 25th of August, we all sailed from London, in the cabin of
a fine ship, commanded by Captain Eldridge, bound for Boston. The
particulars of our stormy and tedious voyage would neither gratify
nor amuse the reader, and they are therefore omitted. Suffice it to
say, that the Atlantic passage could scarcely be more unpleasant
than it was to us; but, by the care of divine Providence, after
being seventy-five days at sea, exposed to every variety of wind
and weather, deprived of religious advantages, and surrounded only
by the ungodly, we safely landed, and found comfortable quarters
at the United States Hotel, in Boston. From thence we proceeded to
Worcester, and then to Wilbraham, where we were hailed with joyful
congratulations by our neighbors, who had begun to mourn us as among
the lost at sea. Most gratefully did we all unite with the minister,
the following Sabbath, in a thank-offering to Almighty God, for his
goodness in preserving us from the dangers of the stormy sea.

Thus, courteous reader, I have conducted thee through the mazes of
my changeful life. Should the facts detailed in these pages lead
thee to feel more interest hereafter in the elevation of the sailor,
my labors will not have been in vain; and should the recital of my
Christian experience induce thee to embrace the same Saviour, who has
become my redemption and sacrifice, I shall joyfully hail thee, when
we meet together in the port of eternity.

To my brothers of the sea, let me add one word. Yours is a life of
danger, of toil, of suffering. Few men care for your souls; but Jesus
regards you. He watches you in all your wanderings; he woos you to
be his! Will you not be persuaded, by a fellow-sailor, to heed his
voice. O sailor, “TURN, TURN, FOR WHY WILL YE DIE!” Go! rest in His
bosom, who says to you, “Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.”




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Near this bridge is a spring, called Rosamond’s Well, where Henry
II. is said to have contrived a labyrinth, by which his guilty fair
one communicated with the castle.

[2] This form of “step-father” seems not to have been unusual in
England 1800-50. _Cf._ Sam Weller’s addressing his father’s second
wife as “mother-in-law.”

[3] Reuben James. See his life by C. T. Brady.

[4] To prevent the recovery of these men by their consul, the
press-gang usually went ashore on the night previous to our going to
sea; so that before they were missed they were beyond his protection.
Sometimes they were cleared on our return to port.

[5] The crew of this vessel mutinied, killed their officers, and ran
the ship into a Spanish port, where she fell into the hands of the
Spaniards, then at war with England. Large rewards were offered for
these mutineers; many were taken, and all who were taken suffered the
penalty of death (1797).

[6] Narrative of the Life and Sufferings of William B. Lighton (an
Englishman), a private in the 60th Regiment--the Rifles.--Troy, N.
Y., 1846. He enlisted at 16, in 1820.

[7] James Holmes, boatswain.

[8] James, in his History of the British Navy, gives this name as
Thomas James Nankivee.

[9] Dennis Colwell.

[10] The colors of the _Macedonian_ are preserved at the Naval
Institute, Annapolis, Md. A number of her cannon are placed on the
green near the Commandant’s quarters at the Brooklyn Navy Yard; and
when she was broken up, many of her timbers were taken to City Island
(now part of New York City), and used as the frame of a hotel still
(1909) standing there.

[11] The official report, from James’ _History of the British Navy_,
of the _Macedonian’s_ casualties was:

  David Hope, First Lieutenant, wounded, leg and head;

  John Bulford, Third Lieutenant, wounded;

  Henry Roebuck, Master’s Mate, wounded;

  George Greenway, Midshipman, wounded;

  Francis Baker, “first-class volunteer,” wounded.

  Of the crew, 36 killed and 68 wounded, of whom two seamen died of
  wounds, and two boys had each one leg amputated. Nine Marines also
  were wounded.

  Aboard the _United States_:

  Second Lieutenant John M. Funck, mortally wounded; one seaman
  mortally wounded; five seamen badly wounded.

  (Unless the five all died, Captain Carden’s statement in his
  official despatch home, “I saw a lieutenant and six seamen thrown
  overboard,” was unfounded.)

[12] John B. Nicholson.

[13] The word “thus” should undoubtedly be placed before “the,” so
as to make the line read: “and thus the flag of a frigate,” etc.
The _Guerrière_ was the first frigate captured, the _Frolic_ (taken
October 18) being a brig.--(ED.)

[14] The first lieutenant of the _United States_, William H. Allen,
took the _Macedonian_ to port.

The list of the _United States’_ officers and their subsequent
records follows:

  Captain Stephen Decatur, who was killed by Captain Barron in the
  historic duel, 1820.

  Lieutenant John B. Nicholson, who appears afterwards in this
  narrative as commander of the _Siren_, 1815, but whose name does
  not thus appear on the navy records. He was captain of the _United
  States_ in 1832, and died in 1846.

  This list has been compiled from various sources, but the Navy
  Department records show an additional midshipman, John J. McCaw,
  who resigned Feb. 23, 1818.

  Lieutenant William H. Allen, who became Commander of the _Argus_ in
  1813, and was mortally wounded in the action with the _Pelican_ in
  the British Channel, August 14, 1813, and is buried at Plymouth,
  England.

  Lieutenant John M. Funck, mortally wounded, as before noted.

  Purser John B. Timberlake. Mr. Timberlake’s wife, who was known
  in Washington as “Peggy” O’Neil, married after his death John
  H. Eaton, Secretary of War, 1829-1831, and became the cause of
  the celebrated “ladies’ quarrel,” as Calhoun termed it, which
  terminated in the disruption of Jackson’s Cabinet in 1831.

  Midshipmen--

  Joseph Cassin, Jr., who died a Lieutenant in 1826.

  Philip F. Voorhees, who died a Captain in 1862.

  John P. Zantzinger, who appears on the Navy List as “dropped”
  in 1855, but who was purser of the _Hornet_ in 1815, when she
  narrowly escaped capture by the British 74 _Cornwallis_. In that
  memorable stern-chase all the guns but one, the cables, boats
  and nearly everything else movable, were thrown overboard to
  lighten the vessel. From the Congressional records we find that in
  1850--_thirty-five_ years after--Congress passed an act allowing
  Mr. Zantzinger payment for what he had been obliged to sacrifice
  under these circumstances, when even the knives and forks were
  thrown overboard.

  Richard Delphy, who was killed in the _Argus_-_Pelican_ encounter,
  August 14, 1813, and is buried at Plymouth, England.

  Dugomier Taylor, who died at sea, as a Lieutenant, October 5, 1819.

  Richard S. Heath, who became Lieutenant, and was killed June 2,
  1817, in a duel with Midshipman J. L. Hopkins, at New York.

  Edward F. Howell, who was killed in the action between the
  _President_ and the _Endymion_, January 15, 1815.

  H. Z. W. Harrington (Henry W., on navy records), resigned April 12,
  1813.

  William Jameson, who died a Commodore April 6, 1873, his record
  surpassing even that of Sloat. He was doubtless the last survivor
  of the famous encounter of sixty-one years before.

  Archibald Hamilton, who became a Lieutenant and was killed in the
  action between the _President_ and the _Endymion_, January 15,
  1815. He was son of Paul Hamilton, then Secretary of the Navy.

  Lewis Hinchman (or Henchman). }

  Benjamin S. Williams,         } of whom no record is found.

  John N. Carr,                 }

  John Stansbury, who was killed in Macdonough’s victory on Lake
  Champlain, September 11, 1814.

  George C. Read, who died a Rear-Admiral in 1862.

  Walter Wooster, drowned June 1, 1813. (The Navy Department gives
  his name as “Winter.”)

  John D. Sloat, who died a Rear-Admiral in 1867, having the
  wonderful record of forty-four years’ active service, having
  entered the navy as a midshipman in 1800--served one year
  until discharged by the peace-establishment. He re-entered as
  sailing-master 1812. In 1847 he secured possession of California
  just in time to forestall the British designs on the Pacific Coast,
  and was on the active list until 1855; retired 1861, but promoted
  until 1866--thus being on the navy list for fifty-seven years.

  Surgeon Samuel R. Trevett, Jr. (died 1822), when surgeon on the
  sloop-of-war _Peacock_.

  Surgeon’s Mate Samuel Vernon, who died February 5, 1814.

  Lieutenant of Marines William Anderson, who died a brevet
  Lieutenant-Colonel, in 1830.

  Second Lieutenant of Marines James L. Edwards, who resigned in 1813.

  The complement of the two vessels, as given by James, was:

  _Macedonian_, 262 men and 35 boys.

  _United States_, 477 men and 1 boy.

[15] This was the celebrated Dr. Nathan Strong (1748-1816), pastor of
the First Congregational Church.

[16] This was Captain Grey, the adjutant-general, son of General
Sir Charles Grey, of the Paoli massacre, September, 1777. Lossing
(_Field-Book War of 1812_) says a drummer-boy cried, “Perhaps not
yet,” fired, and mortally wounded him.

[17] Leech is not to be blamed for his belief in the burning of
witches in New England--in 1909 a New York orator repeated the same
hoary blunder.--(ED.)

[18] George Parker, formerly first lieutenant of the _Constitution_.

[19] The _Grand Turk_ was a noted privateer, commanded at that time
by either Captain Breed or Captain Green, and owned by the famous
Salem merchant, William Gray.

[20] James B. Nicholson, the same who was on the _United States_.

[21] The Washingtonian was a temperance society of the day.

[22] Captain Augustus Bruce (James’ _Hist. British Navy_).

[23] The Barbary sheep entirely resembles the tame kind, excepting in
the tail, which is very much loaded with fat, is often more than a
foot broad, and weighs upwards of twenty pounds. Among this kind of
broad-tailed sheep, there are some whose tails are so long and heavy,
that the shepherds are obliged to fasten a small board with wheels,
to support them as they walk along. This tail, which is a substance
between marrow and fat, is considered a great delicacy.--_See System
of Natural History. Boston: Carter, Hendee & Co., 1834._

[24] Twenty-four doublegees made a rix dollar.

[25] An instance of maternal imprudence was said to have occurred
in this port on board another ship. A poor woman went on board and
inquired for her son, who had run from the British service, and was
then among the captive crew of an American prize. They told her there
was no one of that name among the crew. “He is among the Yankees,”
said she. Hearing this, the prisoners were called up, and the poor,
affectionate, but ill-judging mother, singled out her son, and
embracing him, said, “I have brought you a clean shirt!”

The lieutenant, who stood by them, stepped up, remarking to the
thunder-stricken man, “It’s a clean shirt you want, is it? I will
give you a clean handkerchief”--meaning that he would be hung. The
unhappy youth was accordingly ironed, in presence of the astounded
mother, who now beheld herself the unintentional murderess of her
son. A court-martial was held, and the brutal prediction of the
lieutenant verified.

[26] We were captured July 12, 1814; it was now August, 1815.

[27] If the reader wishes to know why seamen wear their hats on the
back of their heads, let him put his hat on as usual and ascend a
ladder. He will find himself unable to look up until he places it
on the _back of his head_ as a sailor does. Sailors wear their hats
thus, because they could not otherwise ascend the rigging of a ship.

[28] Edward T. Taylor (1793-1871). From 1800 to 1817 he was a sailor.
In 1819 he became a Methodist clergyman. In 1827 he served as
chaplain on the _Macedonian_, which took supplies to the famishing
Irish people. He was a pastor in Boston during the rest of his life,
was known as “Father Taylor,” and was a most successful worker,
particularly among seamen.--(ED.)

[29] Rev. Joel Hawes (1789-1867), for forty-six years pastor of the
First Congregational Church.

[30] Rev. Wilbur Fisk (1792-1839), one of the greatest Methodists
America has known.

[31] It will be _á propos_ to here quote a letter from Thoreau to his
sister Sophia, describing Emerson’s quarters on board the packet-ship
_Washington Irving_, on which he sailed from Boston in 1847: “I went
to Boston to see Mr. E. off. His stateroom was like a carpeted dark
closet, about six feet square, with a large key-hole for a window.
The window was about as big as a saucer, and the glass two inches
thick--not to mention another skylight overhead in the deck, of the
size of an oblong doughnut and about as opaque; of course it would be
in vain to look up if any promenader had his foot upon it. Such will
be his quarters for two or three weeks,” etc.

Such were _first-class_ accommodations six years after Leech made
his voyage, with a certainty of being at least twenty days cooped up
thus, and possibly _seventy-five_, as we shall see actually occurred
on his return. [ED].


